ANDY WARHOAL
The Andy Warhol Museum is located on the North Shore of Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania , in the United States . It is the largest museum in North America dedicated to a single artist. The museum holds an extensive permanent collection of art and archives from the Pittsburgh-born pop art icon Andy Warhol . The Andy Warhol Museum is one of the four Carnegie Museums of Pittsburgh and is a collaborative project of the Carnegie Institute , the Dia Art Foundation and The Andy Warhol Foundation for the Visual Arts (AWFVA). Warhol Self Portrait Exhibit in 2010 The museum is located in an 88,000-square-foot (8,200 m ) facility on seven floors. Containing 17 galleries, the museum features 900 paintings, close to 2,000 works on paper, over 1,000 published unique prints, 77 sculptures, 4,000 photographs, and over 4,350 Warhol films and videotaped works. Its most recent operating budget (2010) was $6.1 million. In addition to its Pittsburgh location the museum has sponsored 56 traveling exhibits that have attracted close to nine million visitors in 153 venues worldwide since 1996. Plans for the museum were announced in October 1989, about 2½ years after Warhol's death. At the time of the announcement, works worth an estimated $80 million were donated to the newly announced museum by the AWFVA and the Dia Art Foundation. Thomas N. Armstrong III , who had been the director of the Whitney Museum of American Art from 1974 to 1990, was named the museum's first director in 1993. Matt Wrbican joined the staff of the museum before it opened, inventorying Warhol's belongings in New York, and has become the archivist and an expert on Warhol's work. By 1993, the 88,000-square-foot (8,200 m ) industrial warehouse and its extensive renovations had cost about $12 million, and the AWFVA had donated more than 1,000 of Warhol's works worth over $55 million, a donation that grew to about 3,000 works. On May 13–14, 1994, the museum attracted about 25,000 visitors to its opening weekend. Armstrong, its founding director, resigned nine months after its opening; at the time of his resignation, the museum had had "tense relations" with the AWFVA and the Carnegie Institute, its financial backer, though The New York Times could find no one involved who would say whether that friction played a role in Armstrong's resignation. On November 1, 1997, the AWFVA donated all Warhol film and video copyrights to the museum. In 2013, it was announced that in Manhattan , New York City , in the Essex Crossing development on the Lower East Side , an annex to the main Pittsburgh museum was scheduled to open by 2017. However, the museum announced in March 2015 that it had dropped its plans to open the New York annex. In October 2019, an audio tape of publicly unknown music by Lou Reed , based on Warhol's 1975 book, “ The Philosophy of Andy Warhol: From A to B and Back Again ”, was reported to have been discovered in an archive at the museum in Pittsburgh. In 2022, the museum announced a $60 million expansion deemed The 'Pop District' covering six blocks in Pittsburgh, PA. The expansion looks to build a music venue, a social media studio called Warhol Creative, and expand places for public art exhibits. The proposed site would be around 58,000 square feet (17,500 square meters), including a first-floor concert venue with standing room for up to 1,000 people, a second-floor mezzanine, and an events space that could hold up to 360 people on the fourth floor. The third floor would be used for offices and support spaces. The project is expected to take ten years and is funded primarily through local foundations. Display of Interview magazine covers The 2010 film She's Out of My League filmed a key scene at the museum during an evening event. The film's subject was hosting the event. The Andy Warhol Diaries (TV series) in 2022 prominently featured museum staff as narrators of Warhol's life. List of single-artist museums Andy Warhol Museum of Modern Art , Medzilaborce, Slovakia Official website Warhol Foundation for the Visual Arts

NORTH SHORE
North Shore is a neighborhood in Pittsburgh 's North Side . Its zip code is 15212. It is home to Acrisure Stadium , PNC Park , and The Andy Warhol Museum . Developing rapidly around and between the two stadiums, the neighborhood has representation on Pittsburgh City Council by council members for District 1 (North Neighborhoods) and 6 (North Shore/Downtown Neighborhoods). Two new light rail stations opened in the spring of 2012. The North Side station is located beside PNC Park and near the north portal of the Allegheny River Tunnel . Allegheny station is located by Acrisure Stadium and is the current western terminus of the line. In October 2014, two 11-story office skyscrapers were proposed for the area by local parking lot manager Alco Parking. The project is likely to move forward, as soon as an anchor tenant can be found. North Shore runs along the Allegheny River and its confluence with the Monongahela River to form the Ohio River . It is bordered by Chateau to the west, Allegheny West to the northwest, Allegheny Center to the north, East Allegheny to the northeast, and Troy Hill to the east. The Roberto Clemente , Andy Warhol , and Rachel Carson Bridges provide direct links to Downtown Pittsburgh as do the first southbound exits across the Veterans and Fort Duquesne Bridges. List of Pittsburgh neighborhoods Interactive Pittsburgh Neighborhoods Map

CARNEGIE SCIENCE CENTER
The Carnegie Science Center , soon to be The Daniel G. and Carole L. Kamin Science Center , is one of the four Carnegie Museums of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania . It is located in the Chateau neighborhood. It is located across the street from Acrisure Stadium . The Carnegie Science Center is the most visited museum in Pittsburgh, and is located along the Ohio River on the North Shore. It has four floors of interactive exhibits totaling over 400 exhibits, and attracts nearly 500,000 visitors each year. Among its attractions are the Buhl Planetarium (which features the latest in digital projection technology), the Rangos Giant Theater (promoted as "the biggest screen in Pittsburgh"), a physical home for some of Carnegie Mellon University ’s Robot Hall of Fame (in the lobby of the Rangos Giant Cinema), SportsWorks , the Miniature Railroad & Village , and the USS Requin (a World War II submarine ). According to Nicholas Efran, "The Carnegie Science Center has been a gathering place for kids and families for many years." However, currently there are many new exhibits that staff are "Not able to include because of the smaller size of the building" In June 2018, the museum's new wing opened, allowing the museum to host new and larger exhibits. In August 2021, the Pittsburgh Zoning Board of Adjustment extended the center's use of its 450-space parking lot until 2026, at which point it will need to significantly reduce the space number to 75 spaces to conform to zoning regulations . In October 2021, the center received funding from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) 's Communities for Immunity initiative because of its support of vaccine confidence in the Pittsburgh community. It used the $10,000 award to contribute to its COVID-19 vaccination awareness programs. In June of 2022, § Roboworld closed. Some of the inductees to the Robot Hall of Fame , such as C-3PO and R2-D2 from " Star Wars ", Maria from " Metropolis ", as well as HAL 9000 from " 2001: A Space Odyssey ", were moved to the Rangos Giant Cinema. The big, free-throw-shooting basketball robot was moved to the § SportsWorks facility. Andy Roid , the singing Robothespian that greets visitors, was moved to the Science Center’s main lobby. All other robots from the exhibit went into storage "until the Science Center decides what to do with it". Its predecessor was the Buhl Planetarium and Institute of Popular Science , which opened on October 24, 1939. The Buhl Planetarium was the fifth major planetarium in the United States , and was popular for several decades. However, by the 1980s it had begun to show signs of age. An expansion was ruled out, so the institute was relocated to the Chateau neighborhood. However, it became apparent to the Buhl Institute that the relocation efforts would require more staffing than they were able to provide. At this point, the Carnegie Institute (under the leadership of Robert Wilburn ) stepped in, showing interest in merging with the Buhl Institute. Both parties agreed to the merger in 1987. On October 5, 1989, construction began on the $40 million building, designed by local architect Tasso Katselas , which was renamed the Carnegie Science Center as a result of the merger. The Henry Buhl Jr. Planetarium and Observatory was reinvented in this new facility. The Center opened in October 1991. On January 23, 2024, the Carnegie Science Center announced that they received a 65 million dollar donation from Daniel G. and Carole L. Kamin. In honor of the donation they announced plans to rename the center to The Daniel G. and Carole L. Kamin Science Center Roboworld formerly at the Carnegie Science Center The Roboworld area was the second-floor attraction at the Carnegie Science Center until June 19, 2022. It was touted as "the world's largest permanent robotics exhibition", with more than 30 interactive displays featuring "all things robotic". Until it closed, the first robot encounter in Roboworld was Andy Roid , the Robothespian, an interactive , animatronic robot that introduced visitors to the concepts of robotic sensing, processing and acting. The area's other exhibits showcased different types of robots and videos about them. Roboworld was also home to famous robots such as R2D2, Hal9000, C-3PO, and Gort. The Robot Hall of Fame featured famous robots from science fiction films, television, and video games, such as R2-D2 , C-3PO , Data , the T-800 Terminator , R.O.B. , Maschinenmensch , Gort , Robby the Robot , Robot B-9 , HAL 9000 , and Huey, Dewey, and Louie from Silent Running . Highmark SportsWorks (formerly UPMC SportsWorks ) is one of the major, permanent exhibits of the Carnegie Science Center. It is one of larger science and sports exhibitions in the world, with over 30 interactive experiences in which visitors can participate. The main idea of SportsWorks is "to inspire learning and curiosity by uniting the experience of sports for every age level with the laws of science that controls sports." SportsWorks features three themed areas: Physics of Sports (exploring the science of balance, trajectory, center of gravity, momentum, etc.), LifeWorks (featuring information for keeping a healthy lifestyle), and Sports Challenge (demonstrating various physical activities present in many sports). The previous sponsor, UPMC , ended its sponsorship of SportsWorks in 2006. On November 13, 2008, the Carnegie Science Center unveiled plans for a new 12,000-square-foot (1,100 m ) SportsWorks, sponsored by Highmark . It reopened in the Fall of 2009. From October 8, 2007, until May 2008, SportsWorks housed the controversial exhibit BODIES... The Exhibition . At least one employee of the Carnegie Science Center left her job due to the implementation of this exhibit. A committee from Pittsburgh Regional Transit , then known as Port Authority, recommended in 2007 that the site be purchased and that SportsWorks be demolished to allow for construction of tracks for the North Shore Connector , an extension of Pittsburgh's light rail line to the North Side of Pittsburgh. The E-motion cone is a white-colored, inverted cone which sits atop the Science Center building. It is referred to as the Weather Cone and was designed by New York architect Shashi Caan and lighting designer Matthew Tanteri. It was installed in 2000 with a computerized lighting system. In 2008 a storm damaged the cone, thus it underwent upgrades to its lighting system with an addition of energy-efficient bulbs. At night, it is lit with different colors, signalling the weather forecast from WTAE-TV for the coming day. Miniature Railroad & Village Carnegie Museums of Pittsburgh List of museums in Pennsylvania Seddon Bennington - director of the museum from 1994 until 2002 List of science centers 
The Carnegie Science Center , soon to be The Daniel G. and Carole L. Kamin Science Center , is one of the four Carnegie Museums of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania . It is located in the Chateau neighborhood. It is located across the street from Acrisure Stadium . The Carnegie Science Center is the most visited museum in Pittsburgh, and is located along the Ohio River on the North Shore. It has four floors of interactive exhibits totaling over 400 exhibits, and attracts nearly 500,000 visitors each year. Among its attractions are the Buhl Planetarium (which features the latest in digital projection technology), the Rangos Giant Theater (promoted as "the biggest screen in Pittsburgh"), a physical home for some of Carnegie Mellon University ’s Robot Hall of Fame (in the lobby of the Rangos Giant Cinema), SportsWorks , the Miniature Railroad & Village , and the USS Requin (a World War II submarine ). According to Nicholas Efran, "The Carnegie Science Center has been a gathering place for kids and families for many years." However, currently there are many new exhibits that staff are "Not able to include because of the smaller size of the building" In June 2018, the museum's new wing opened, allowing the museum to host new and larger exhibits. In August 2021, the Pittsburgh Zoning Board of Adjustment extended the center's use of its 450-space parking lot until 2026, at which point it will need to significantly reduce the space number to 75 spaces to conform to zoning regulations . In October 2021, the center received funding from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) 's Communities for Immunity initiative because of its support of vaccine confidence in the Pittsburgh community. It used the $10,000 award to contribute to its COVID-19 vaccination awareness programs. In June of 2022, § Roboworld closed. Some of the inductees to the Robot Hall of Fame , such as C-3PO and R2-D2 from " Star Wars ", Maria from " Metropolis ", as well as HAL 9000 from " 2001: A Space Odyssey ", were moved to the Rangos Giant Cinema. The big, free-throw-shooting basketball robot was moved to the § SportsWorks facility. Andy Roid , the singing Robothespian that greets visitors, was moved to the Science Center’s main lobby. All other robots from the exhibit went into storage "until the Science Center decides what to do with it". Its predecessor was the Buhl Planetarium and Institute of Popular Science , which opened on October 24, 1939. The Buhl Planetarium was the fifth major planetarium in the United States , and was popular for several decades. However, by the 1980s it had begun to show signs of age. An expansion was ruled out, so the institute was relocated to the Chateau neighborhood. However, it became apparent to the Buhl Institute that the relocation efforts would require more staffing than they were able to provide. At this point, the Carnegie Institute (under the leadership of Robert Wilburn ) stepped in, showing interest in merging with the Buhl Institute. Both parties agreed to the merger in 1987. On October 5, 1989, construction began on the $40 million building, designed by local architect Tasso Katselas , which was renamed the Carnegie Science Center as a result of the merger. The Henry Buhl Jr. Planetarium and Observatory was reinvented in this new facility. The Center opened in October 1991. On January 23, 2024, the Carnegie Science Center announced that they received a 65 million dollar donation from Daniel G. and Carole L. Kamin. In honor of the donation they announced plans to rename the center to The Daniel G. and Carole L. Kamin Science Center Roboworld formerly at the Carnegie Science Center The Roboworld area was the second-floor attraction at the Carnegie Science Center until June 19, 2022. It was touted as "the world's largest permanent robotics exhibition", with more than 30 interactive displays featuring "all things robotic". Until it closed, the first robot encounter in Roboworld was Andy Roid , the Robothespian, an interactive , animatronic robot that introduced visitors to the concepts of robotic sensing, processing and acting. The area's other exhibits showcased different types of robots and videos about them. Roboworld was also home to famous robots such as R2D2, Hal9000, C-3PO, and Gort. The Robot Hall of Fame featured famous robots from science fiction films, television, and video games, such as R2-D2 , C-3PO , Data , the T-800 Terminator , R.O.B. , Maschinenmensch , Gort , Robby the Robot , Robot B-9 , HAL 9000 , and Huey, Dewey, and Louie from Silent Running . Highmark SportsWorks (formerly UPMC SportsWorks ) is one of the major, permanent exhibits of the Carnegie Science Center. It is one of larger science and sports exhibitions in the world, with over 30 interactive experiences in which visitors can participate. The main idea of SportsWorks is "to inspire learning and curiosity by uniting the experience of sports for every age level with the laws of science that controls sports." SportsWorks features three themed areas: Physics of Sports (exploring the science of balance, trajectory, center of gravity, momentum, etc.), LifeWorks (featuring information for keeping a healthy lifestyle), and Sports Challenge (demonstrating various physical activities present in many sports). The previous sponsor, UPMC , ended its sponsorship of SportsWorks in 2006. On November 13, 2008, the Carnegie Science Center unveiled plans for a new 12,000-square-foot (1,100 m ) SportsWorks, sponsored by Highmark . It reopened in the Fall of 2009. From October 8, 2007, until May 2008, SportsWorks housed the controversial exhibit BODIES... The Exhibition . At least one employee of the Carnegie Science Center left her job due to the implementation of this exhibit. A committee from Pittsburgh Regional Transit , then known as Port Authority, recommended in 2007 that the site be purchased and that SportsWorks be demolished to allow for construction of tracks for the North Shore Connector , an extension of Pittsburgh's light rail line to the North Side of Pittsburgh. The E-motion cone is a white-colored, inverted cone which sits atop the Science Center building. It is referred to as the Weather Cone and was designed by New York architect Shashi Caan and lighting designer Matthew Tanteri. It was installed in 2000 with a computerized lighting system. In 2008 a storm damaged the cone, thus it underwent upgrades to its lighting system with an addition of energy-efficient bulbs. At night, it is lit with different colors, signalling the weather forecast from WTAE-TV for the coming day. Miniature Railroad & Village Carnegie Museums of Pittsburgh List of museums in Pennsylvania Seddon Bennington - director of the museum from 1994 until 2002 List of science centers Official website

GARFILED
Garfield is a neighborhood in the East End of the City of Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania , United States. Garfield is bordered on the South by Bloomfield and Friendship (at Penn Avenue ), on the West by the Allegheny Cemetery (at Mathilda Street), on the North by Stanton Heights (at Mossfield Street), and on the East by East Liberty (at Negley Avenue). Like many parts of Pittsburgh , Garfield is a fairly steep neighborhood, with north-south residential streets running at about a 20% incline from Penn Avenue at the bottom to Mossfield Street at the top. Garfield is divided into “the valley” and “the hilltop.” Garfield is part of District 9 on the Pittsburgh City Council, and is currently represented by Rev. Ricky Burgess. The Garfield neighborhood has 13 distinct flights of city steps - many of which are open and in a safe condition. In Garfield, the Steps of Pittsburgh quickly connect pedestrians to public transportation and the Penn Avenue business corridor and provide an easy way to access the Fort Pitt Playground and neighborhood parklets. The recently refurbished N Winebiddle Street city steps in Garfield. Photo by Laura Zurowski. Like nearby Bloomfield and Friendship , the land comprising modern-day Garfield was acquired by Casper Taub from the local Delaware tribe . Taub sold it to his son-in-law, Joseph Conrad Winebiddle, in the late 18th century. About a hundred years later, Winebiddle's descendants broke the family estate into lots and sold them to new residents of an expanding City of Pittsburgh . The first owner of a lot in present-day Garfield bought his plot in 1881, on the day that U.S. President James Garfield was buried, so the neighborhood was named for the late President. Garfield's earliest settlers were predominantly blue-collar Irish laborers and their families, who worked in the mills and foundries down along the Allegheny River, shopped in local stores on Penn Avenue, and built and lived in modest brick foursquare homes on the streets running up from Penn Avenue. The community, then almost exclusively Catholic, built St. Lawrence O'Toole Parish on Penn Avenue in 1897. From 1880 until about 1960, the neighborhood remained as it began: a solid, working-class area. Neighborhood activist Aggie Brose described Garfield in 1960 as a place where "You sponsored each other's kids, you went to all the weddings and funerals, you never wanted for a baby-sitter, you never had to call a repairman, you didn't need for a social. When you put the kids to bed, the women went out on the stoops." Things changed in the 1960s, when some Garfield residents began to leave the City for nearby suburbs in Shaler and Penn Hills. In response, the City's Urban Redevelopment Authority (URA) used eminent domain and attempted to change nearby East Liberty from an urban shopping area, then the third-busiest retail center in Pennsylvania, to a suburban one. The URA knocked down many small shops, accessible on foot or by bus, and thereby opened land for larger ones, accessible by car. At the same time, the City's housing authority built several massive public housing complexes on Garfield's borders: Garfield Heights, a 600+ unit complex high up on Fern Street, and the East Mall, a 20+ story tower straddling Penn Avenue at the entrance to East Liberty. These changes, designed to halt the slow trickle of Garfield residents to the suburbs, instead turned a trickle into a torrent. East Liberty lost most of its businesses, and the new housing projects, inhabited by poor African-Americans, unnerved Garfield residents. In 1969 the federal government gave the City funds to enforce housing codes in Garfield so that as old residents fled, their homes were not allowed to deteriorate. This move also backfired: long-time residents, told that homes built in 1900 (and often passed through families over the years) did not meet codes written in 1960, moved away rather than pay for upgrades. Thus began a textbook case of white flight : in 1970, Garfield had a population of roughly 10,000 people, 80% of them white. In 2000, Garfield's population had been cut almost in half to 5,450 people, 83% of them black. To halt what they perceived as the neighborhood's decline, in 1975 parishioners at St. Lawrence O'Toole founded the Bloomfield-Garfield Corporation (BGC), a Community Development Corporation that uses private and government funds and activism to encourage home ownership and business development. Over the years, the organization has built or renovated dozens of housing units, and renovated commercial properties for dozens of small businesses, from restaurants to art galleries to theater companies. In the 1980s, a similar group called the Garfield Jubilee Association formed, with a goal of creating affordable housing. In recent years, the two groups have joined together in a joint project to build dozens of new single-family homes. In 2000, the BGC and Friendship Development Associates, Inc. formed the Penn Avenue Arts Initiative. The PAAI encourages artists to live and work along the Avenue by rehabbing properties, making small loans or grants for facade renovations, and organizing joint marketing events such as Unblurred, held the first Friday of each month, where the venues of Garfield and Friendship open for special events. Efforts by groups like these, along with a recent recognition that massive, 1960s-style social welfare projects often had negative consequences, have helped to revitalize the neighborhood. Commercially, Penn Avenue is recovering from the flight of local businesses in the 1970s and 1980s. Some bastions of the old neighborhood remain, as groups like the BGC and GJA, and FDA have worked to keep some banks and stores along Penn Avenue. Since 1990, these have been joined by newcomers: African-American barbershops and salons, tiny family-owned Vietnamese restaurants, and a series of arts-related businesses (e.g., theatres, galleries, an architecture studio, a glass factory, a coffeeshop, and much more) attracted by the PAAI. There has also been some positive residential development: the East Mall and Garfield Heights Senior highrise was razed in 2005, and the townhouse units are scheduled to be demolished in 2007–2008, and replaced with mixed-income units, as well as new replacement homes scattered through the neighborhood. Visitors to Garfield today will see a neighborhood on the rise, a formerly blighted community that is now becoming a vibrant community, with a focus on the arts, while not forgetting its roots ( [1] ). The Bulletin (Pittsburgh) , a monthly community newspaper serving Garfield List of Pittsburgh neighborhoods Pittsburgh Glass Center Toker, Franklin (1994) [1986]. Pittsburgh: An Urban Portrait . Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press. ISBN 0-8229-5434-6 . Media related to Garfield (Pittsburgh) at Wikimedia Commons

ALLEGHENY CENTER
Allegheny Center is a neighborhood on Pittsburgh 's North Side . Its zip code is 15212, and it has representation on Pittsburgh City Council by both council members for District 6 (Downtown, North Shore ) and District 1 (Northside). In 1783, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania established a 3000-acre tract of land north of where the Allegheny River merged with the Ohio River . John Redick created an initial town plan for Allegheny City - which featured 36 city blocks surrounded by a common grazing area - the following year. That initial 36-block area is today's Allegheny Center. It is still surrounded on three sides by the former grazing area, now a public park called Allegheny Commons . On either side of this park are the neighborhoods of Allegheny West and East Allegheny . Because Allegheny City was intended by the Pennsylvania Legislature to serve as the county seat of Allegheny County , the central blocks of Redick's 36-block plan were designed for public uses, including a market house and post office. The main thoroughfare was East Ohio Street, which stretched from Allegheny West through Allegheny Center and then to Allegheny East and beyond. From the 19th century to 1907, Allegheny Center was thus the hub of downtown Allegheny City . The Children's Museum of Pittsburgh (consisting of the old Allegheny Post Office and Buhl Planetarium joined by a 2006 addition) is located within it, as is the old Carnegie Free Library of Allegheny (now the New Hazlett Theater and the Children's MuseumLab). Allegheny Center is also home to the National Aviary , situated within West Park . After 1907 (when Pittsburgh annexed Allegheny City ), this area continued to be a hub for those residents of what was now Pittsburgh's North Side . But the area deteriorated as: 1) Allegheny's wealthiest residents, who had founded Allegheny Country Club in 1895, moved the club to Sewickley in 1902 and began moving their residences along with it; 2) the Great Depression caused an economic slowdown; and 3) rationing during World War II prevented much investment in the buildings. As one example of the trend, the landmark Boggs & Buhl department store, which had done a thriving business among Allegheny City's wealthy residents, steadily lost money after 1931 and was closed in 1958. In the 1950s, community leaders discussed how to revitalize the historic hub of Allegheny City and established a modern plan for Allegheny Center. Designed by architects Deeter & Ritchey, it involved a $65 million project by Alcoa Properties, Inc. The construction project razed about 518 buildings (including the Boggs & Buhl department store) - many of them taken by eminent domain - to make way for 2 professional buildings, 4 apartment complexes totaling 840 units, 50 townhouses, a shopping mall, and a 3-acre (12,000 m ) public square. The public square was the object of an international design competition sponsored by the Pittsburgh Urban Redevelopment Authority . The entire Allegheny Redevelopment Area encompasses approximately 79 acres (320,000 m ) on the North Side, about a half-mile from downtown Pittsburgh. The project converted what had been an open, walkable business district into an enclosed mall called Allegheny Center Mall that had few pedestrian entrances and sat above an underground parking garage. The central portion of East Ohio Street was closed, and drivers were forced to take a new ring road around the mall and the other blocks of Redick's initial plan to proceed east or west. The former Allegheny Center Mall from PNC Park in 2014. The mall, opened in 1965 and anchored by Sears , F. W. Woolworth Company , and Zayre , had some initial success, but it did not revive the business fortunes of Allegheny City, which continued to decline after Interstate 279 allowed area residents to drive to the northern suburbs to shop. The mall's stores began closing in the 1990s, and the mall gradually became a successful office complex. Today, the 36-block area initially planned by John Redick consists of the Allegheny Center Mall - now Nova Place, which contains 1.5 million square feet of Class A office space in the old mall concourse, plus two of the office towers, restaurants, including Federal Galley, a fitness center, and Alloy 26, Pittsburgh's largest coworking space, which is located in the concourse - and several public structures including the Children's Museum of Pittsburgh . A former business district along North Avenue in Central Northside , which deteriorated along with Allegheny Center, is also being revived. Allegheny West Central Northside East Allegheny North Shore List of Pittsburgh neighborhoods Toker, Franklin (1994) [1986]. Pittsburgh: An Urban Portrait . Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press. ISBN 0-8229-5434-6 . Allegheny Center Children's Museum of Pittsburgh history History of the Buhl Planetarium

Roberto Enrique Clemente Walker ( Spanish pronunciation: [roˈβeɾto enˈrike kleˈmente (ɣ)walˈkeɾ] ; August 18, 1934 – December 31, 1972) was a Puerto Rican professional baseball player who played 18 seasons in Major League Baseball (MLB) for the Pittsburgh Pirates , primarily as a right fielder . In December 1972, Clemente died in the crash of a plane he had chartered to take emergency relief goods for the survivors of a massive earthquake in Nicaragua . After his sudden death, the National Baseball Hall of Fame changed its rules so that a player who had been dead for at least six months would be eligible for entry. In 1973, Clemente was posthumously inducted, becoming the first player from the Caribbean and Latin America to be honored in the Hall of Fame. Born in Carolina, Puerto Rico , Clemente was a track and field star and an Olympic hopeful in his youth before deciding to turn his full attention to baseball. His professional career began at the age of eighteen, with the Cangrejeros de Santurce of the Puerto Rican Professional Baseball League . He quickly attracted the attention of the Brooklyn Dodgers who signed him to a bonus of $10,000. However, due to the bonus rule under which Clemente had signed and the Dodgers decision to send him to the minor leagues, they lost Clemente to the Pittsburgh Pirates who drafted him after the 1954 season. Clemente was an All-Star for 13 seasons, selected to 15 All-Star Games. He was the National League (NL) Most Valuable Player (MVP) in 1966, the NL batting leader in 1961, 1964, 1965, and 1967, and a Gold Glove Award winner for 12 consecutive seasons from 1961 through 1972. His batting average was over .300 for 13 seasons and he had 3,000 hits during his major league career. He also was a two-time World Series champion . Clemente was the first player from the Caribbean and Latin America to win a World Series as a starting position player (1960), to receive an NL MVP Award (1966), and to receive a World Series MVP Award (1971). During the offseason, in addition to playing winter ball in Puerto Rico, Clemente was involved in charity work in Latin American and Caribbean countries. In 1972, he died in a plane crash at the age of 38 while en route to deliver aid to victims of the Nicaragua earthquake . The following season, the Pittsburgh Pirates retired his uniform number 21. In his honor, Major League baseball renamed the Commissioner's Award, given to the player who "best exemplifies the game of baseball, sportsmanship, community involvement and the individual's contribution to his team", to the Roberto Clemente Award . Clemente was born on August 18, 1934, in Barrio San Antón in Carolina, Puerto Rico , to Luisa Walker and Melchor Clemente. He was the youngest of seven siblings (three were from his mother's previous marriage). During Clemente's childhood, his father worked as a foreman for sugar cane crops located in the municipality in the northeastern part of the island. Because the family's resources were limited, Clemente and his brothers worked alongside his father in the fields, loading and unloading trucks. Clemente had first shown interest in baseball early in life and often played against neighboring barrios . When he was fourteen, he was recruited by Roberto Marín to play softball with the Sello Rojo team after he was seen playing baseball in barrio San Antón. He was with the team two years as a shortstop . He attended Julio Vizcarrondo High School in Carolina where he was a track and field star, participating in the high jump and javelin throw. Clemente was considered good enough to represent Puerto Rico at the Olympics . He later stated that throwing the javelin helped in strengthening his arm and with his footwork and release. Despite his all-around athletic skill, however, Clemente decided to focus on baseball and went on to join Puerto Rico's amateur league, playing for the Ferdinand Juncos team, which represented the municipality of Juncos . Clemente's professional career began at age 18 when he accepted a contract from Pedrín Zorrilla with Cangrejeros de Santurce ("Crabbers"), a winter league team and franchise of the Puerto Rican Professional Baseball League (LBPPR). Clemente signed with the team on October 9, 1952. He was a bench player during his first season but was promoted to the Cangrejeros' starting lineup the following season. During this season he hit .288 as the team's leadoff hitter. While Clemente was playing in the Puerto Rican League, the Brooklyn Dodgers offered him a contract of $15,000 – $10,000 bonus and $5000 league minimum salary. Clemente signed with them on February 19, 1954. At the time of Clemente's signing, the bonus rule implemented by Major League Baseball was still in effect. The rule stipulated that when a major league team signed a player to a contract with a signing bonus in excess of $4,000 ($55,000 today), the team was required to keep that player on their 25-man active roster for two full seasons and failure to comply with the rule would result in the team losing the rights to that player's contract, and the player would then be exposed to the waiver wire. As Clemente's bonus was larger than $4,000, he was considered a bonus baby. However, the Dodgers decided against benching him for two years in the majors and decided to place him with the Montreal Royals , their International League Triple-A affiliate. While it is often believed that the Dodgers instructed manager Max Macon to use Clemente sparingly to prevent him from being drafted under the Rule 5 Draft , Macon himself denied it. Box scores also suggest that Macon platooned Clemente the same as he did with other outfielders. Affected early on by both climate and language differences, Clemente received assistance from bilingual teammates such as infielder Chico Fernandez and pitchers Tommy Lasorda and Joe Black . Black was the original target of the Pittsburgh Pirates ' scouting trip to Richmond on June 1, 1954. Noticing Clemente in batting practice, Pirates scout Clyde Sukeforth made inquiries and soon learned about Clemente's status as an unprotected bonus baby . Twelve years later, manager Macon acknowledged that "we tried to sneak him through the draft, but it didn't work" but denied being instructed to not play Clemente, stating that the player needed time to develop and was struggling against Triple-A pitching. However, Pittsburgh noticed his raw talents; as Sukeforth recalled years later, "I knew then he'd be our first draft choice. I told Montreal manager Max Macon to take good care of 'our boy' and see that he didn't get hurt." In 87 games with the Royals, Clemente hit .257 with two home runs. The first home run of his North American baseball career came on July 25, 1954; Clemente's extra inning , walk-off home run was hit in his first at-bat after entering the game as a defensive replacement . His only other minor league home run came on September 5. On his 20th birthday, August 8, he made a notable game-ending outfield assist , cutting down the potential tying run at the plate. At the end of the season, Clemente returned to play for Santurce where one of his teammates was Willie Mays . While with the team, the Pirates made Clemente the first selection of the Rule 5 draft that took place on November 22, 1954. For all but the first seven weeks of his major league career, Clemente wore number 21, so chosen because his full name of Roberto Clemente Walker had that many letters. For his first few weeks, Clemente wore the number 13, as his teammate Earl Smith was wearing number 21. It was later reassigned to Clemente. During the off-seasons (except the 1958–59, 1962–63, 1965–66, 1968–69, 1971–72, and 1972–73 seasons), Clemente played professionally for the Cangrejeros de Santurce , Criollos de Caguas , and Senadores de San Juan in the Liga de Béisbol Profesional de Puerto Rico , where he was considered a star. He sometimes managed the San Juan team. Clemente in the U.S. Marine Corps Reserve in September 1958. In September 1958, Clemente joined the United States Marine Corps Reserve . He served his six-month active duty commitment at Parris Island , South Carolina , Camp LeJeune in North Carolina , and Washington, D.C. At Parris Island, Clemente received recruit training with Platoon 346 of the 3rd Recruit Battalion. The rigorous Marine Corps training programs helped Clemente physically; he added strength by gaining ten pounds and said his back troubles, caused by being in a 1954 auto accident, disappeared as a result of the training. He was a private first class in the Marine Corps Reserve until September 1964. The Pirates struggled through several difficult seasons through the 1950s. They did have a winning season in 1958, their first since 1948. Clemente debuted with the Pirates on April 17, 1955, wearing uniform number 13, in the first game of a doubleheader against the Brooklyn Dodgers . Early in his career with the Pirates, he was frustrated by racial and ethnic tensions, with sniping by the local media and some teammates. Clemente responded to this by saying "I don't believe in color." He said that, during his upbringing, he was taught never to discriminate against someone based on ethnicity. Clemente was at a double disadvantage, as he was a Latin American and Caribbean player whose first language was Spanish and was of partially African descent. The year before, the Pirates had hired Curt Roberts , their first African-American player. They were the fifth team in the NL and ninth in the major leagues to do so, seven years after Jackie Robinson broke baseball's color line by joining the Dodgers. When Clemente arrived in Pittsburgh, Roberts befriended him and helped him adjust to life in the major league, as well as in the Pittsburgh area. During his rookie season, Clemente had to sit out several games, as he had suffered a lower back injury in Puerto Rico the previous winter. A speeding, drunk driver rammed into his car at an intersection. He finished his rookie season with a .255 batting average, despite trouble hitting certain types of pitches. His defensive skills were highlighted during this season. Clemente in 1957 The following season, on July 25, 1956, at Forbes Field , Clemente erased a three-run, ninth-inning deficit with a bases-clearing inside-the-park home run , thus becoming the first—and, as yet, only—player in modern Major League history (since 1900) to hit a documented walk-off, inside-the-park grand slam . Pittsburgh-based sportswriter John Steigerwald said that it " may have been done only once in the history of baseball." Clemente was still fulfilling his Marine Corps Reserve duty during spring of 1959 and set to be released from Camp Lejeune until April 4. A Pennsylvania state senator, John M. Walker , wrote to US Senator Hugh Scott requesting an early release on March 4 so Clemente could join the team for spring training. Early in the 1960 season, Clemente led the league with a .353 batting average, and the 14 extra-base hits and 25 RBIs recorded in May alone resulted in Clemente's selection as the National League 's Player of the Month . His batting average would remain above the .300 mark throughout the course of the campaign. On August 5 at Forbes Field , Clemente crashed into the right-field wall while making a pivotal play, depriving San Francisco 's Willie Mays of a leadoff , extra-base hit in a game eventually won by Pittsburgh, 1–0. The resulting injury necessitated five stitches to the chin and a five-game layoff for Clemente, while the catch itself was described by Giants beat writer Bob Stevens as "rank[ing] with the greatest of all time, as well as one of the most frightening to watch and painful to make." The Pirates compiled a 95–59 record during the regular season, winning the NL pennant, and defeated the New York Yankees in a seven-game World Series . Clemente batted .310 in the series, hitting safely at least once in every game. His .314 batting average, 16 home runs, and defensive playing during the course of the season had earned him his first spot on the NL All-Star roster as a reserve player, and he replaced Hank Aaron in right field during the 7th and 8th innings in the second All-Star game held that season (two All-Star games were held each season from 1959 through 1962). During spring training in 1961, following advice from Pirates' batting coach George Sisler , Clemente tried to modify his batting technique by using a heavier bat to slow the speed of his swing. During the 1961 season, Clemente was named the starting NL right fielder for the first of two All-Star games and went 2 for 4; he hit a triple on his first at-bat and scored the team's first run, then drove in the second with a sacrifice fly . With the AL ahead 4–3 in the 10th inning, he teamed with fellow future HOFers Hank Aaron , Willie Mays , and Frank Robinson to engineer a come-from-behind 5–4 NL victory, culminating in Clemente's walk-off single off knuckleballer Hoyt Wilhelm . Clemente started again in right field for the second All-Star game held that season and was 0 for 2, flying and grounding out in the 2nd and 4th innings. That season he received his first Gold Glove Award . Following the 1961 season, he traveled to Puerto Rico along with Orlando Cepeda , who was a native of Ponce . When both players arrived, they were received by 18,000 people. During this time, he was also involved in managing the Senadores de San Juan of the Puerto Rican League, as well as playing with the team during the major league off-season. During the course of the winter league, Clemente injured his thigh while doing some work at home but wanted to participate in the league's all-star game. He pinch-hit in the game and got a single, but experienced a complication of his injury as a result, and had to undergo surgery shortly after being carried off the playing field. This condition limited his role with the Pirates in the first half of the 1965 season, during which he batted .257. Although he was inactive for many games, when he returned to the regular starting lineup, he got hits in 33 out of 34 games and his batting average climbed up to .340. He participated as a pinch hitter and replaced Willie Stargell playing left field during the All-Star Game on July 15. Clemente in 1966 Clemente was an All-Star every season he played in the 1960s other than 1968—the only year in his career after 1959 in which he failed to hit above .300—and a Gold Glove winner for each of his final 12 seasons, beginning in 1961. He won the NL batting title four times: 1961, 1964, 1965, and 1967, and won the league's MVP Award in 1966, hitting .317 with a career-high 29 home runs and 119 RBIs. In 1967, Clemente registered a career-high .357 batting average, hit 23 home runs, and batted in 110 runs. Following that season, in an informal poll conducted by Sport Magazine at baseball's Winter Meetings , a plurality of major league GMs declared Clemente "the best player in baseball today," edging out AL Triple Crown winner Carl Yastrzemski by a margin of 8 to 6, with one vote each going to Hank Aaron , Bob Gibson , Bill Freehan and Ron Santo . In an effort to make him seem more American, sportswriters started calling him "Bob" or "Bobby". His baseball cards even listed him as "Bob Clemente", a practice that persisted through to 1969. He disliked the practice, which he felt was disrespectful to his Puerto Rican and Latino heritage. Clemente would correct reporters who referred to him as "Bob" during post-game interviews, but the issue continued throughout the 1960s. The 1970 season was the last one that the Pirates played at Forbes Field before moving to Three Rivers Stadium ; for Clemente, abandoning this stadium was an emotional situation. The Pirates' final game at Forbes Field occurred on June 28, 1970. That day, Clemente said that it was hard to play in a different field, saying, "I spent half my life there." The night of July 24, 1970, was declared "Roberto Clemente Night"; on this day, several Puerto Rican fans traveled to Three Rivers Stadium and cheered Clemente while wearing traditional Puerto Rican attire. A ceremony to honor Clemente took place, during which he received a scroll with 300,000 signatures compiled in Puerto Rico, and several thousands of dollars were donated to charity work following Clemente's request. During the 1970 season, Clemente compiled a .352 batting average; the Pirates won the NL East pennant but were subsequently eliminated by the Cincinnati Reds . During the offseason, Roberto Clemente experienced some tense situations while he was working as manager of the Senadores and when his father, Melchor Clemente, experienced medical problems and underwent surgery. In the 1971 season, the Pirates won the NL East, defeated the San Francisco Giants in four games to win the NL pennant, and faced the Baltimore Orioles in the World Series . Baltimore had won 101 games (third season in row with 100+ wins) and swept the American League Championship Series , both for the third consecutive year, and were the defending World Series champions. The Orioles won the first two games in the series, but Pittsburgh won the championship in seven games. This marked the second occasion that Clemente helped win a World Series for the Pirates. Over the course of the series, Clemente had a .414 batting average (12 hits in 29 at-bats ), performed well defensively, and hit a solo home run in the deciding 2–1 seventh game victory. Following the conclusion of the season, he received the World Series Most Valuable Player Award . Although he was frustrated and struggling with injuries, Clemente played in 102 games and hit .312 during the 1972 season . He also made the annual NL All-Star roster for the fifteenth (15th) time (he played in 14/15 All-Star games) and won his twelfth consecutive Gold Glove. On September 30, he hit a double in the fourth inning off Jon Matlack of the New York Mets at Three Rivers Stadium for his 3,000th. It was his last regular season at-bat of his career. By playing in right field in one more regular season game, on October 3, Clemente tied Honus Wagner 's record for games played as a Pittsburgh Pirate, with 2,433 games played. In the NL playoffs that season, he batted .235 as he went 4 for 17. His last game was October 11, 1972, at Cincinnati's Riverfront Stadium in the fifth and final game of the 1972 NLCS , won by the Reds in the bottom of the 9th inning. Clemente had his final hit (single) in the 1st inning; his final plate appearance was an intentional walk in the 8th inning. He and Bill Mazeroski were the last Pirate players remaining from the 1960 World Series championship team. Clemente spent much of his time during the off-season involved in charity work. He also visited Managua , the capital city of Nicaragua , in late 1972, while managing the Puerto Rico national baseball team at the 1972 Amateur World Series . When Managua was affected by a massive earthquake three weeks later, on December 23, 1972, Clemente immediately set to work arranging emergency relief flights. He soon learned, however, that the aid packages on the first three flights had been diverted by corrupt officials of the Somoza government, never reaching victims of the quake. He decided to accompany the fourth relief flight, hoping that his presence would ensure that the aid would be delivered to the survivors. The airplane which he chartered for the New Year's Eve flight, a Douglas DC-7 cargo plane , had a history of mechanical problems and it also had an insufficient number of flight personnel (the flight was missing a flight engineer and a copilot), and it was also overloaded by 4,200 pounds (1,900 kg). It crashed into the Atlantic Ocean off the coast of Isla Verde, Puerto Rico immediately after takeoff on December 31, 1972, due to engine failure. A search and rescue effort was immediately launched, led by the USCGC Sagebrush . A few days after the crash, the body of the pilot and part of the fuselage of the plane were found. An empty flight case which apparently belonged to Clemente was the only personal item of his which was recovered from the plane. Clemente's teammate and close friend Manny Sanguillén was the only member of the Pirates who did not attend Roberto's memorial service. Instead, the Pirates catcher chose to dive into the waters where Clemente's plane had crashed in an effort to find his teammate. The bodies of Clemente and three others who were also on the four-engine plane were never recovered. Montreal Expos pitcher Tom Walker , then playing winter league ball in Puerto Rico, had helped him load the plane. Because Clemente wanted Walker, who was single, to go and enjoy New Year's Eve, Clemente told him not to join him on the flight. A few hours later, Walker returned to his condo and discovered that the plane carrying Clemente had crashed. In an interview for the ESPN documentary series SportsCentury in 2002, Clemente's widow Vera mentioned that Clemente had told her that he thought he was going to die young several times. Indeed, while he was being asked when he would get his 3,000th career hit by broadcaster and future fellow Hall of Famer Richie Ashburn in July 1971 during the All-Star Game activities, Clemente's response was "Well, uh, you never know. I, I, uh, if I'm alive, like I said before, you never know because God tells you how long you're going to be here. So you never know what can happen tomorrow." At the time of his death, Clemente had established several records with the Pirates, including most triples in a single game (three) and hits in two consecutive games (ten). He won 12 Gold Glove Awards and shares the record of most won among outfielders with Willie Mays . Clemente was an All-Star for 13 seasons, selected to 15 All-Star Games. He won the NL MVP Award in 1966, and was named NL Player of the Month Award three times (May 1960, May 1967, July 1969). Clemente led the Pirates to two World Series titles, being named World Series MVP in 1971. Clemente had two three-home run games in his career, as well as eight five-hit games in MLB. Roberto Clemente's number 21 was retired by the Pittsburgh Pirates in 1973. On March 20, 1973, the Baseball Writers' Association of America held a special election for the Baseball Hall of Fame . They voted to waive the waiting period for Clemente, due to the circumstances of his death, and posthumously elected him for induction into the Hall of Fame, giving him 393 out of 424 available votes, for 92.7% of the votes. Clemente's number 21 was retired by the Pittsburgh Pirates on April 6, 1973, a few months after his election to the Hall of Fame. There have been calls for MLB to retire number 21 league-wide, as was done with Jackie Robinson 's number 42 in 1997, but the sentiment has been opposed by the Robinson family. In 1999, Clemente was ranked number 20 on The Sporting News list of the 100 Greatest Baseball Players, the highest-ranking Latin American and Caribbean player on the list. Later that year, he was nominated as a finalist for the Major League Baseball All-Century Team . In 2020, The Athletic ranked Clemente at number 40 on its "Baseball 100" list, complied by sportswriter Joe Posnanski . In 2007, Clemente was selected for the All Time Rawlings Gold Glove Team for the 50th anniversary of the creation of the Gold Glove Award . He was named to Major League Baseball's Latino Legends Team in 2005. In 1973, Major League Baseball renamed the Commissioner's Award to the Roberto Clemente Award . It has been awarded every year to a player with outstanding baseball playing skills who is personally involved in community work. A trophy and a donation check for a charity of the player's choice are presented annually at the World Series . Clemente was elected to the Hispanic Heritage Baseball Museum Hall of Fame in 2010, and the Caribbean Baseball Hall of Fame in 2015. In 2003, he was also inducted into the United States Marine Corps Sports Hall of Fame. Near the old Forbes Field where Clemente began his major league career, the city of Pittsburgh renamed a street in his honor. Additionally, the city named Roberto Clemente Memorial Park in his honor. At Pirate City , the Pirates spring training home in Bradenton, Florida , a section of 27th Street East is named Roberto Clemente Memorial Highway. The United States Postal Service issued a Roberto Clemente postal stamp on August 17, 1984. The stamp was designed by Juan Lopez-Bonilla and shows Clemente wearing a Pittsburgh Pirates baseball cap with a Puerto Rican flag in the background. A statue of Clemente outside of PNC Park in Pittsburgh. The Pirates originally erected a statue in memory of Clemente at Three Rivers Stadium , just before the 1994 Major League Baseball All-Star Game . It has since been moved to PNC Park when it opened in 2001, and stands outside the park's centerfield gates. In 1974, the Harlem River State Park in Morris Heights , The Bronx, New York City , was renamed Roberto Clemente State Park in his honor. In 2013, forty years after his election to the Hall of Fame, a statue was unveiled at the park. It was the first statue honoring a Puerto Rican to be unveiled in New York City . In 2012, the Puerto Rico Professional Baseball League (LBPPR) was renamed Liga de Béisbol Profesional Roberto Clemente, the number 21 was also permanently retired. A number of schools have been named after Clemente, including the Roberto Clemente Community Academy in Chicago , and the Roberto Clemente Charter School in Allentown, Pennsylvania . In 2002, 30 years after his death, Major League Baseball proclaimed September 15 as "Roberto Clemente Day". In 1973, President Richard Nixon posthumously honored Clemente with the Presidential Citizens Medal . That same day, Congress honored Clemente with the Congressional Gold Medal . In 2003, President George W. Bush awarded Clemente the Presidential Medal of Freedom . Clemente is an iconic sports figure in Puerto Rico , widely revered by his people. In 2022, the government of Puerto Rico granted Clemente the formal recognition of prócer (national hero). The Coliseo Roberto Clemente , opened in 1973 in San Juan , and Estadio Roberto Clemente , opened in 2000 in Carolina , are both named in his honor. Clemente was married on November 14, 1964 to Vera Zabala at San Fernando Church in Carolina . The couple had three children: Roberto (often referred to as "Roberto Jr."), born in 1965; Luis Roberto, born in 1966; and Roberto Enrique, born in 1969. Vera Clemente died on November 16, 2019, aged 78. Clemente was a devout Catholic . In the 2010s, there was an initiative to have him canonized by the Catholic Church. List of Gold Glove Award winners at outfield List of baseball players who died during their careers List of Major League Baseball batting champions List of Major League Baseball annual triples leaders List of Major League Baseball career doubles leaders List of Major League Baseball career home run leaders List of Major League Baseball career batting average leaders List of Major League Baseball career hits leaders List of Major League Baseball career extra base hits leaders List of Major League Baseball career runs batted in leaders List of Major League Baseball career runs scored leaders List of Major League Baseball career total bases leaders List of Major League Baseball career triples leaders List of Major League Baseball players from Puerto Rico List of Major League Baseball players who spent their entire career with one franchise List of Puerto Rican Presidential Citizens Medal recipients List of Puerto Rican Presidential Medal of Freedom recipients Career statistics and player information from MLB , or ESPN , or Baseball Reference , or Fangraphs , or Baseball Reference (Minors) , or Retrosheet , or Beisbol 101 Roberto Clemente Foundation Roberto Clemente at the Baseball Hall of Fame Roberto Clemente at the SABR Baseball Biography Project Roberto Clemente at IMDb

The Green Pharmacy Cross (sometimes overlaid with Bowl of Hygieia ), is widely used in Europe and India on pharmacy signs. A medication is a drug used to diagnose, cure, treat, or prevent disease. The Apothecary or The Chemist by Gabriël Metsu ( c. 1651 –67) Pharmacy is the science and practice of discovering, producing, preparing, dispensing, reviewing and monitoring medications , aiming to ensure the safe, effective, and affordable use of medicines . It is a miscellaneous science as it links health sciences with pharmaceutical sciences and natural sciences . The professional practice is becoming more clinically oriented as most of the drugs are now manufactured by pharmaceutical industries. Based on the setting, pharmacy practice is either classified as community or institutional pharmacy. Providing direct patient care in the community of institutional pharmacies is considered clinical pharmacy . The scope of pharmacy practice includes more traditional roles such as compounding and dispensing of medications. It also includes more modern services related to health care including clinical services, reviewing medications for safety and efficacy, and providing drug information with patient counselling. Pharmacists , therefore, are experts on drug therapy and are the primary health professionals who optimize the use of medication for the benefit of the patients. An establishment in which pharmacy (in the first sense) is practiced is called a pharmacy (this term is more common in the United States) or chemists (which is more common in Great Britain, though pharmacy is also used). In the United States and Canada, drugstores commonly sell medicines, as well as miscellaneous items such as confectionery , cosmetics , office supplies , toys , hair care products and magazines , and occasionally refreshments and groceries. In its investigation of herbal and chemical ingredients, the work of the apothecary may be regarded as a precursor of the modern sciences of chemistry and pharmacology , prior to the formulation of the scientific method . Pharmacy, Tacuinum sanitatis casanatensis (14th century) The field of pharmacy can generally be divided into various disciplines: Pharmaceutics and Computational Pharmaceutics Pharmacokinetics and Pharmacodynamics Medicinal Chemistry and Pharmacognosy Pharmacology Pharmacy Practice Pharmacoinformatics Pharmacogenomics The boundaries between these disciplines and with other sciences, such as biochemistry, are not always clear-cut. Often, collaborative teams from various disciplines (pharmacists and other scientists) work together toward the introduction of new therapeutics and methods for patient care. However, pharmacy is not a basic or biomedical science in its typical form. Medicinal chemistry is also a distinct branch of synthetic chemistry combining pharmacology, organic chemistry, and chemical biology. Pharmacology is sometimes considered the fourth discipline of pharmacy. Although pharmacology is essential to the study of pharmacy, it is not specific to pharmacy. Both disciplines are distinct. Those who wish to practice both pharmacy (patient-oriented) and pharmacology (a biomedical science requiring the scientific method) receive separate training and degrees unique to either discipline. Pharmacoinformatics is considered another new discipline, for systematic drug discovery and development with efficiency and safety. Pharmacogenomics is the study of genetic-linked variants that effect patient clinical responses, allergies, and metabolism of drugs. The World Health Organization estimates that there are at least 2.6 million pharmacists and other pharmaceutical personnel worldwide. Pharmacists are healthcare professionals with specialized education and training who perform various roles to ensure optimal health outcomes for their patients through the quality use of medicines. Pharmacists may also be small business proprietors, owning the pharmacy in which they practice. Since pharmacists know about the mode of action of a particular drug, and its metabolism and physiological effects on the human body in great detail, they play an important role in optimization of drug treatment for an individual. Pharmacists are represented internationally by the International Pharmaceutical Federation (FIP), an NGO linked with World Health Organization (WHO). They are represented at the national level by professional organisations such as the Royal Pharmaceutical Society in the UK, Pharmaceutical Society of Australia (PSA), Canadian Pharmacists Association (CPhA), Indian Pharmacist Association (IPA), Pakistan Pharmacists Association (PPA), American Pharmacists Association (APhA), and the Malaysian Pharmaceutical Society (MPS). In some cases, the representative body is also the registering body, which is responsible for the regulation and ethics of the profession. In the United States, specializations in pharmacy practice recognized by the Board of Pharmacy Specialties include: cardiovascular, infectious disease , oncology , pharmacotherapy, nuclear, nutrition , and psychiatry . The Commission for Certification in Geriatric Pharmacy certifies pharmacists in geriatric pharmacy practice. The American Board of Applied Toxicology certifies pharmacists and other medical professionals in applied toxicology . A pharmacy worker distributing drugs to an old woman at a local clinic. Pharmacy technicians support the work of pharmacists and other health professionals by performing a variety of pharmacy-related functions, including dispensing prescription drugs and other medical devices to patients and instructing on their use. They may also perform administrative duties in pharmaceutical practice, such as reviewing prescription requests with medic's offices and insurance companies to ensure correct medications are provided and payment is received. Legislation requires the supervision of certain pharmacy technician's activities by a pharmacist. The majority of pharmacy technicians work in community pharmacies . In hospital pharmacies, pharmacy technicians may be managed by other senior pharmacy technicians. In the UK the role of a PhT in hospital pharmacy has grown and responsibility has been passed on to them to manage the pharmacy department and specialized areas in pharmacy practice allowing pharmacists the time to specialize in their expert field as medication consultants spending more time working with patients and in research. Pharmacy technicians are registered with the General Pharmaceutical Council (GPhC). The GPhC is the regulator of pharmacists, pharmacy technicians, and pharmacy premises. In the US, pharmacy technicians perform their duties under the supervision of pharmacists. Although they may perform, under supervision, most dispensing, compounding and other tasks, they are not generally allowed to perform the role of counseling patients on the proper use of their medications. Some states have a legally mandated pharmacist-to-pharmacy technician ratio . Dispensing assistants are commonly referred to as "dispensers" and in community pharmacies perform largely the same tasks as a pharmacy technician. They work under the supervision of pharmacists and are involved in preparing (dispensing and labelling) medicines for provision to patients. In the UK, this group of staff can sell certain medicines (including pharmacy only and general sales list medicines) over the counter. They cannot prepare prescription-only medicines for supply to patients. Physician and Pharmacist, illustration from Medicinarius (1505) by Hieronymus Brunschwig The earliest known compilation of medicinal substances was the Sushruta Samhita , an Indian Ayurvedic treatise attributed to Sushruta in the 6th century BC. However, the earliest text as preserved dates to the 3rd or 4th century AD. Many Sumerian (4th millennium BC – early 2nd millennium BC) cuneiform clay tablets record prescriptions for medicine. Ancient Egyptian pharmacological knowledge was recorded in various papyri such as the Ebers Papyrus of 1550 BC, and the Edwin Smith Papyrus of the 16th century BC. Dioscorides, De Materia Medica , Byzantium, 15th century In Ancient Greece , Diocles of Carystus (4th century BC) was one of several men studying the medicinal properties of plants. He wrote several treatises on the topic. The Greek physician Pedanius Dioscorides is famous for writing a five-volume book in his native Greek Περί ύλης ιατρικής in the 1st century AD. The Latin translation De Materia Medica ( Concerning medical substances ) was used as a basis for many medieval texts and was built upon by many middle eastern scientists during the Islamic Golden Age , themselves deriving their knowledge from earlier Greek Byzantine medicine Byzantine Medicine . Pharmacy in China dates at least to the earliest known Chinese manual, the Shennong Bencao Jing ( The Divine Farmer's Herb-Root Classic ), dating back to the 1st century AD. It was compiled during the Han dynasty and was attributed to the mythical Shennong . Earlier literature included lists of prescriptions for specific ailments, exemplified by a manuscript "Recipes for 52 Ailments", found in the Mawangdui , sealed in 168 BC. In Japan, at the end of the Asuka period (538–710) and the early Nara period (710–794), the men who fulfilled roles similar to those of modern pharmacists were highly respected. The place of pharmacists in society was expressly defined in the Taihō Code (701) and re-stated in the Yōrō Code (718). Ranked positions in the pre- Heian Imperial court were established; and this organizational structure remained largely intact until the Meiji Restoration (1868). In this highly stable hierarchy, the pharmacists—and even pharmacist assistants—were assigned status superior to all others in health-related fields such as physicians and acupuncturists. In the Imperial household, the pharmacist was even ranked above the two personal physicians of the Emperor. There is a stone sign for a pharmacy shop with a tripod, a mortar, and a pestle opposite one for a doctor in the Arcadian Way in Ephesus near Kusadasi in Turkey. The current Ephesus dates back to 400 BC and was the site of the Temple of Artemis, one of the seven wonders of the world. In Baghdad the first pharmacies, or drug stores, were established in 754, under the Abbasid Caliphate during the Islamic Golden Age . By the 9th century, these pharmacies were state-regulated. The advances made in the Middle East in botany and chemistry led medicine in medieval Islam substantially to develop pharmacology . Muhammad ibn Zakarīya Rāzi (Rhazes) (865–915), for instance, acted to promote the medical uses of chemical compounds. Abu al-Qasim al-Zahrawi (Abulcasis) (936–1013) pioneered the preparation of medicines by sublimation and distillation . His Liber servitoris is of particular interest, as it provides the reader with recipes and explains how to prepare the "simples" from which were compounded the complex drugs then generally used. Sabur Ibn Sahl (d 869), was, however, the first physician to record his findings in a pharmacopoeia , describing a large variety of drugs and remedies for ailments. Al-Biruni (973–1050) wrote one of the most valuable Islamic works on pharmacology, entitled Kitab al-Saydalah ( The Book of Drugs ), in which he detailed the properties of drugs and outlined the role of pharmacy and the functions and duties of the pharmacist. Avicenna , too, described no less than 700 preparations, their properties, modes of action, and their indications. He devoted in fact a whole volume to simple drugs in The Canon of Medicine . Of great impact were also the works by al-Maridini of Baghdad and Cairo , and Ibn al-Wafid (1008–1074), both of which were printed in Latin more than fifty times, appearing as De Medicinis universalibus et particularibus by ' Mesue ' the younger, and the Medicamentis simplicibus by ' Abenguefit '. Peter of Abano (1250–1316) translated and added a supplement to the work of al-Maridini under the title De Veneris . Al-Muwaffaq's contributions in the field are also pioneering. Living in the 10th century, he wrote The foundations of the true properties of Remedies , amongst others describing arsenious oxide , and being acquainted with silicic acid . He made clear distinction between sodium carbonate and potassium carbonate , and drew attention to the poisonous nature of copper compounds, especially copper vitriol , and also lead compounds. He also describes the distillation of sea-water for drinking. In Europe , pharmacy-like shops began to appear during the 12th century. In 1240, emperor Frederic II issued a decree by which the physician's and the apothecary's professions were separated. Löwen-Apotheke in Trier , operating continuously from at least 1241 Sign of the Town Hall Pharmacy in Tallinn , operating continuously from at least 1422, showing the Bowl of Hygieia There are pharmacies in Europe that have been in operation since medieval times. In Florence , Italy, the director of the museum in the former Santa Maria Novella pharmacy says that the pharmacy there dates back to 1221. In Trier (Germany), the Löwen-Apotheke is in operation since 1241, the oldest pharmacy in Europe in continuous operation. In Dubrovnik (Croatia), a pharmacy that first opened in 1317 is located inside the Franciscan monastery: it is the 2nd oldest pharmacy in Europe that is still operating. In the Town Hall Square of Tallinn (Estonia), there is a pharmacy dating from at least 1422. The medieval Esteve Pharmacy , located in Llívia , a Catalan enclave close to Puigcerdà , is a museum: the building dates back to the 15th century and the museum keeps albarellos from the 16th and 17th centuries, old prescription books and antique drugs. Pharmacists practice in a variety of areas including community pharmacies, infusion pharmacies, hospitals, clinics, insurance companies, medical communication companies, research facilities, pharmaceutical companies, extended care facilities, psychiatric hospitals, and regulatory agencies. Pharmacists themselves may have expertise in a medical specialty . A pharmacy in Klaukkala , Finland A pharmacy (also known as a chemist in Australia , New Zealand and the British Isles ; or drugstore in North America ; retail pharmacy in industry terminology; or apothecary , historically) is where most pharmacists practice the profession of pharmacy. It is the community pharmacy in which the dichotomy of the profession exists; health professionals who are also retailers. Community pharmacies usually consist of a retail storefront with a dispensary, where medications are stored and dispensed. According to Sharif Kaf al-Ghazal, the opening of the first drugstores are recorded by Muslim pharmacists in Baghdad in 754 AD. Pharmacies within hospitals differ considerably from community pharmacies. Some pharmacists in hospital pharmacies may have more complex clinical medication management issues, and pharmacists in community pharmacies often have more complex business and customer relations issues. Because of the complexity of medications including specific indications, effectiveness of treatment regimens, safety of medications (i.e., drug interactions) and patient compliance issues (in the hospital and at home), many pharmacists practicing in hospitals gain more education and training after pharmacy school through a pharmacy practice residency, sometimes followed by another residency in a specific area. Those pharmacists are often referred to as clinical pharmacists and they often specialize in various disciplines of pharmacy. For example, there are pharmacists who specialize in hematology/oncology, HIV/AIDS, infectious disease, critical care, emergency medicine , toxicology, nuclear pharmacy, pain management, psychiatry, anti-coagulation clinics, herbal medicine , neurology/epilepsy management, pediatrics, neonatal pharmacists and more. Hospital pharmacies can often be found within the premises of the hospital. Hospital pharmacies usually stock a larger range of medications, including more specialized medications, than would be feasible in the community setting. Most hospital medications are unit-dose, or a single dose of medicine. Hospital pharmacists and trained pharmacy technicians compound sterile products for patients including total parenteral nutrition (TPN), and other medications are given intravenously. That is a complex process that requires adequate training of personnel, quality assurance of products, and adequate facilities. Several hospital pharmacies have decided to outsource high-risk preparations and some other compounding functions to companies who specialize in compounding. The high cost of medications and drug-related technology and the potential impact of medications and pharmacy services on patient-care outcomes and patient safety require hospital pharmacies to perform at the highest level possible. Pharmacists provide direct patient care services that optimize the use of medication and promotes health, wellness, and disease prevention. Clinical pharmacists care for patients in all health care settings, but the clinical pharmacy movement initially began inside hospitals and clinics . Clinical pharmacists often collaborate with physicians and other healthcare professionals to improve pharmaceutical care. Clinical pharmacists are now an integral part of the interdisciplinary approach to patient care. They often participate in patient care rounds for drug product selection. In the UK clinical pharmacists can also prescribe some medications for patients on the NHS or privately, after completing a non-medical prescribers course to become an Independent Prescriber. The clinical pharmacist's role involves creating a comprehensive drug therapy plan for patient-specific problems, identifying goals of therapy, and reviewing all prescribed medications prior to dispensing and administration to the patient. The review process often involves an evaluation of the appropriateness of drug therapy (e.g., drug choice, dose, route, frequency, and duration of therapy) and its efficacy. Research shows that pharmacist led strategies reduce errors related to medication use. The pharmacist must also consider potential drug interactions, adverse drug reactions, and patient drug allergies while they design and initiate a drug therapy plan. Since the emergence of modern clinical pharmacy, ambulatory care pharmacy practice has emerged as a unique pharmacy practice setting. Ambulatory care pharmacy is based primarily on pharmacotherapy services that a pharmacist provides in a clinic. Pharmacists in this setting often do not dispense drugs, but rather see patients in-office visits to manage chronic disease states. In the U.S. federal health care system (including the VA, the Indian Health Service, and NIH) ambulatory care pharmacists are given full independent prescribing authority. In some states, such North Carolina and New Mexico , these pharmacist clinicians are given collaborative prescriptive and diagnostic authority. In 2011 the board of Pharmaceutical Specialties approved ambulatory care pharmacy practice as a separate board certification. The official designation for pharmacists who pass the ambulatory care pharmacy specialty certification exam will be Board Certified Ambulatory Care Pharmacist and these pharmacists will carry the initials BCACP. Compounding involves preparing drugs in forms that are different from the generic prescription standard. This may include altering the strength, ingredients, or dosage form. Compounding is a way to create custom drugs for patients who may not be able to take the medication in its standard form, such as due to an allergy or difficulty swallowing. Compounding is necessary for these patients to still be able to properly get the prescriptions they need. One area of compounding is preparing drugs in new dosage forms. For example, if a drug manufacturer only provides a drug as a tablet, a compounding pharmacist might make a medicated lollipop that contains the drug. Patients who have difficulty swallowing the tablet may prefer to suck the medicated lollipop instead. Another form of compounding is by mixing different strengths (g, mg, mcg) of capsules or tablets to yield the desired amount of medication indicated by the physician , physician assistant , nurse practitioner , or clinical pharmacist practitioner . This form of compounding is found at community or hospital pharmacies or in-home administration therapy. Compounding pharmacies specialize in compounding, although many also dispense the same non-compounded drugs that patients can obtain from community pharmacies. Consultant pharmacy practice focuses more on medication regimen review (i.e. "cognitive services") than on actual dispensing of drugs. Consultant pharmacists most typically work in nursing homes , but are increasingly branching into other institutions and non-institutional settings. Traditionally consultant pharmacists were usually independent business owners, though in the United States many now work for a large pharmacy management company such as Omnicare , Kindred Healthcare or PharMerica . This trend may be gradually reversing as consultant pharmacists begin to work directly with patients, primarily because many elderly people are now taking numerous medications but continue to live outside of institutional settings. Some community pharmacies employ consultant pharmacists and/or provide consulting services. The main principle of consultant pharmacy is developed by Hepler and Strand in 1990. Veterinary pharmacies, sometimes called animal pharmacies , may fall in the category of hospital pharmacy, retail pharmacy or mail-order pharmacy. Veterinary pharmacies stock different varieties and different strengths of medications to fulfill the pharmaceutical needs of animals. Because the needs of animals, as well as the regulations on veterinary medicine , are often very different from those related to people, in some jurisdictions veterinary pharmacy may be kept separate from regular pharmacies. Nuclear pharmacy focuses on preparing radioactive materials for diagnostic tests and for treating certain diseases. Nuclear pharmacists undergo additional training specific to handling radioactive materials, and unlike in community and hospital pharmacies, nuclear pharmacists typically do not interact directly with patients. Airman 1st Class Breanna DeMasters and Staff Sgt. Giovanni Fiorito, 332nd Expeditionary Medical Group pharmacy technicians, fill prescription medication for patients, Oct. 7, Joint Base Balad Iraq. Military pharmacy is a different working environment to civilian practise because military pharmacy technicians perform duties such as evaluating medication orders, preparing medication orders, and dispensing medications. This would be illegal in civilian pharmacies because these duties are required to be performed by a licensed registered pharmacist. In the US military, state laws that prevent technicians from counseling patients or doing the final medication check prior to dispensing to patients (rather than a pharmacist solely responsible for these duties) do not apply. Pharmacy informatics is the combination of pharmacy practice science and applied information science. Pharmacy informaticists work in many practice areas of pharmacy, however, they may also work in information technology departments or for healthcare information technology vendor companies. As a practice area and specialist domain, pharmacy informatics is growing quickly to meet the needs of major national and international patient information projects and health system interoperability goals. Pharmacists in this area are trained to participate in medication management system development, deployment, and optimization. Specialty pharmacies supply high-cost injectable, oral, infused, or inhaled medications that are used for chronic and complex disease states such as cancer, hepatitis, and rheumatoid arthritis. Unlike a traditional community pharmacy where prescriptions for any common medication can be brought in and filled, specialty pharmacies carry novel medications that need to be properly stored, administered, carefully monitored, and clinically managed. In addition to supplying these drugs, specialty pharmacies also provide lab monitoring, adherence counseling, and assist patients with cost-containment strategies needed to obtain their expensive specialty drugs. In the US, it is currently the fastest-growing sector of the pharmaceutical industry with 19 of 28 newly FDA approved medications in 2013 being specialty drugs. Due to the demand for clinicians who can properly manage these specific patient populations, the Specialty Pharmacy Certification Board has developed a new certification exam to certify specialty pharmacists. Along with the 100 questions computerized multiple-choice exam, pharmacists must also complete 3,000 hours of specialty pharmacy practice within the past three years as well as 30 hours of specialty pharmacist continuing education within the past two years. The pharmaceutical sciences are a group of interdisciplinary areas of study concerned with the design , manufacturing , action , delivery , and classification of drugs . They apply knowledge from chemistry ( inorganic , physical , biochemical and analytical ), biology ( anatomy , physiology , biochemistry , cell biology , and molecular biology ), epidemiology , statistics , chemometrics , mathematics , physics , and chemical engineering . The pharmaceutical sciences are further subdivided into several specific specialties , with four main branches: Pharmacology : the study of the biochemical and physiological effects of drugs on human beings . Pharmacodynamics : the study of the cellular and molecular interactions of drugs with their receptors . Simply "What the drug does to the body" Pharmacokinetics : the study of the factors that control the concentration of drug at various sites in the body. Simply "What the body does to the drug" Pharmaceutical toxicology : the study of the harmful or toxic effects of drugs. Pharmacogenomics : the study of the inheritance of characteristic patterns of interaction between drugs and organisms. Pharmaceutical chemistry : the study of drug design to optimize pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics, and synthesis of new drug molecules ( Medicinal Chemistry ). Pharmaceutics : the study and design of drug formulation for optimum delivery , stability , pharmacokinetics, and patient acceptance . Pharmacognosy : the study of medicines derived from natural sources. As new discoveries advance and extend the pharmaceutical sciences, subspecialties continue to be added to this list. Importantly, as knowledge advances, boundaries between these specialty areas of pharmaceutical sciences are beginning to blur. Many fundamental concepts are common to all pharmaceutical sciences. These shared fundamental concepts further the understanding of their applicability to all aspects of pharmaceutical research and drug therapy . Pharmacocybernetics (also known as pharma-cybernetics, cybernetic pharmacy, and cyber pharmacy) is an emerging field that describes the science of supporting drugs and medications use through the application and evaluation of informatics and internet technologies, so as to improve the pharmaceutical care of patients. The word pharmacy is derived from Old French farmacie "substance, such as a food or in the form of a medicine which has a laxative effect" from Medieval Latin pharmacia from Greek pharmakeia ( Greek : φαρμακεία ) "a medicine", which itself derives from pharmakon ( φάρμακον ), meaning "drug, poison , spell " (which is etymologically related to pharmakos ). Separation of prescribing and dispensing, also called dispensing separation, is a practice in medicine and pharmacy in which the physician who provides a medical prescription is independent from the pharmacist who provides the prescription drug . In the Western world there are centuries of tradition for separating pharmacists from physicians. In Asian countries, it is traditional for physicians to also provide drugs. In contemporary time researchers and health policy analysts have more deeply considered these traditions and their effects. Advocates for separation and advocates for combining make similar claims for each of their conflicting perspectives, saying that separating or combining reduces conflict of interest in the healthcare industry , unnecessary health care , and lowers costs, while the opposite causes those things. Research in various places reports mixed outcomes in different circumstances. In 2022 the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development proposed that pharmaceutical companies should be required to collect and destroy unused or expired medicines that they have put on the market in order to reduce public health risks around the misuse of medicines obtained from waste bins, the development of antimicrobial resistant bacteria from the discharge of antibiotics into environmental systems and "economic losses" from wasted healthcare resources. Potentially harmful concentrations of pharmaceutical waste has been detected in more than a quarter of water samples taken from 258 rivers around the world. OECD recommend that medicines should be collected separately from household waste and that "marketplaces and redistribution platforms for unused close-to-expiry-date medicines" should be set up. Such extended producer responsibility schemes are already running in France, Spain and Portugal. Pharmacists now go on rounds with doctors and have more patient interaction. In the coming decades, pharmacists are expected to become more integral within the health care system . Rather than simply dispensing medication, pharmacists are increasingly expected to be compensated for their patient care skills. In particular, Medication Therapy Management (MTM) includes the clinical services that pharmacists can provide for their patients. Such services include a thorough analysis of all medication ( prescription , non-prescription, and herbals) currently being taken by an individual. The result is a reconciliation of medication and patient education resulting in increased patient health outcomes and decreased costs to the health care system. This shift has already commenced in some countries; for instance, pharmacists in Australia receive remuneration from the Australian Government for conducting comprehensive Home Medicines Reviews. In Canada, pharmacists in certain provinces have limited prescribing rights (as in Alberta and British Columbia) or are remunerated by their provincial government for expanded services such as medications reviews (Medschecks in Ontario). In the United Kingdom, pharmacists who undertake additional training are obtaining prescribing rights and this is because of pharmacy education . They are also being paid for by the government for medicine use reviews . In Scotland, the pharmacist can write prescriptions for Scottish registered patients of their regular medications, for the majority of drugs, except for controlled drugs, when the patient is unable to see their doctor, as could happen if they are away from home or the doctor is unavailable. In the United States, pharmaceutical care or clinical pharmacy has had an evolving influence on the practice of pharmacy. Moreover, the Doctor of Pharmacy (Pharm. D.) degree is now required before entering practice and some pharmacists now complete one or two years of residency or fellowship training following graduation. In addition, consultant pharmacists , who traditionally operated primarily in nursing homes , are now expanding into direct consultation with patients, under the banner of "senior care pharmacy". In addition to patient care, pharmacies will be a focal point for medical adherence initiatives. There is enough evidence to show that integrated pharmacy based initiatives significantly impact adherence for chronic patients. For example, a study published in NIH shows "pharmacy based interventions improved patients' medication adherence rates by 2.1 percent and increased physicians' initiation rates by 38 percent, compared to the control group". List of pharmaceutical sciences journals The symbols most commonly associated with pharmacy are the mortar and pestle (North America) and the ℞ ( medical prescription ) character, which is often written as "Rx" in typed text; the green Greek cross in France , Argentina , the United Kingdom , Belgium , Ireland , Italy , Spain , and India ; the Bowl of Hygieia (only) often used in the Netherlands but may be seen combined with other symbols elsewhere. Other common symbols include conical measures , and (in the US) caduceuses , in their logos . A red stylized letter A in used Germany and Austria (from Apotheke , the German word for pharmacy, from the same Greek root as the English word " apothecary "). The show globe was used in the US until the early 20th century; the Gaper in the Netherlands is increasingly rare. Watkins, Elizabeth Siegel (2009). "From History of Pharmacy to Pharmaceutical History". Pharmacy in History . 51 (1): 3–13. PMID 20027914 . (in Japanese) Asai, T. (1985). Nyokan Tūkai . Tokyo: Kōdan-Sha. (in French) Titsingh, Isaac , ed. (1834). [Siyun-sai Rin-siyo/ Hayashi Gahō , 1652], Nipon o daï itsi ran ; ou, Annales des empereurs du Japon. Paris: Oriental Translation Fund of Great Britain and Ireland . ...Click link for digitized, full-text copy of this book (in French) Pharmacy Consulting Services | McKesson – A landmark study in hospital pharmacy performance based on an extensive literature review and the collective experience of the Health Systems Pharmacy Executive Alliance. Navigator History of Pharmacy Collection of internet resources related to the history of pharmacy Soderlund Pharmacy Museum – Information about the history of the American Drugstore The Lloyd Library Library of botanical, medical, pharmaceutical, and scientific books and periodicals, and works of allied sciences American Institute of the History of Pharmacy American Institute of the History of Pharmacy—resources in the history of pharmacy International Pharmaceutical Federation (FIP) Federation representing national associations of pharmacists and pharmaceutical scientists. Information and resources relating to pharmacy education, practice, science and policy

PENNSYLVANIA HISTORICAL AND MUSEUM COMMISSION
The Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission ( PHMC ) is the governmental agency of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania , responsible for the collection, conservation, and interpretation of Pennsylvania's heritage. The commission cares for historical manuscripts, public records, and objects of historical interest; museums; archeology; publications; historic sites and properties; historic preservation; geographic names; and the promotion of public interest in Pennsylvania history. PHMC was established on June 6, 1945, by state Act No. 446, merging the Pennsylvania Historical Commission (PHC) , The State Museum of Pennsylvania , and Pennsylvania State Archives . The PHMC administers the Historical Marker Program, which, when it began in 1914, installed metal plaques onto large rocks and boulders to commemorate individuals, events, and landmarks throughout the state. The Pennsylvania Historical Commission, the predecessor to the PHMC, launched the program. The markers were redesigned in 1945–46 to make them easier to read from a passing car. Large cast aluminum markers were mounted on poles along a street or road, close to where a landmark was located, a person lived or worked, or an event occurred. By 2020, more than 2,000 markers were in place and were being maintained by the PHMC. The PHMC has posted criteria for inclusion for new markers and accepts marker proposals from the public. PHMC also publishes Pennsylvania Heritage magazine in conjunction with the Pennsylvania Heritage Foundation . Brandywine Battlefield Cornwall Iron Furnace Drake Well Museum Eckley Miners' Village Ephrata Cloister Erie Maritime Museum Landis Valley Museum Old Economy Village Pennsbury Manor Pennsylvania Anthracite Heritage Museum Pennsylvania Lumber Museum Pennsylvania Military Museum Pennsylvania State Archives Railroad Museum of Pennsylvania Scranton Iron Furnaces State Museum of Pennsylvania Bushy Run Battlefield Conrad Weiser Homestead Daniel Boone Homestead Fort Pitt Museum Graeme Park Hope Lodge Joseph Priestley House Somerset Historical Center U.S. Brig Niagara Curtin Village at Eagle Ironworks Historical Site French Azilum The Highlands Mather Mill Old Chester Court House Peace Church Washington Crossing Historic Park The commission is organized as an independent administrative board, including nine citizens of the Commonwealth appointed by the Governor , the state's Secretary of Education , two members of the Pennsylvania State Senate appointed by the President Pro Tempore and Minority Leader, and two members of the Pennsylvania State House of Representatives appointed by the Speaker and Minority Leader. In March 2019, the chair was Nancy Moses, and the executive director was Andrea Lowery. PHMC Commissioners as of March 2019 were: Ophelia M. Chambliss, Andy Dinniman , William V. Lewis, Robert Matzie, Fredrick C. Powell, Pedro Rivera , Robert M. Savakinus, Joseph B. Scarnati III , David Schuyler, Kenneth C. Turner, Parke Wentling, and Philip D. Zimmermann. History of Pennsylvania List of Pennsylvania state agencies List of Pennsylvania state historical markers Western Pennsylvania Conservancy Trails of History

Coordinates : 40°26′47″N 79°54′09″W ﻿ / ﻿ 40.446350°N 79.902512°W ﻿ / 40.446350; -79.902512

Point Breeze , or South Point Breeze , is a largely residential neighborhood in Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania , USA . The community was named after a tavern once located there. Like nearby Squirrel Hill , it contains a large Jewish population, but is still majority Catholic and contributes to a high percentage of students enrolled in Taylor Allderdice High School , Oakland Catholic High School , and Central Catholic High School . The most prominent feature of Point Breeze is Henry Clay Frick 's Clayton, which is a part of the 5.5-acre (2.2 ha) Frick Art & Historical Center . Nearby is St. Bede School, a Catholic school, and the Pittsburgh New Church School. It is also the home to two Pittsburgh Public Schools , Linden Academy elementary school and Sterrett Middle School , and the Reformed Presbyterian Theological Seminary . The neighborhood also hosts much open space, with Westinghouse Park , Mellon Park , the scenic Homewood Cemetery , as well as the northern edge of Frick Park within its borders. Pulitzer Prize winner Annie Dillard 's popular memoir , An American Childhood , is set in Point Breeze during the 1950s. As a child she attended Park Place Elementary . Both of John Edgar Wideman 's memoirs, Brothers and Keepers and Hoop Roots , use North Point Breeze's Westinghouse Park as a setting, as well as in his fictional Homewood Trilogy . Although officially distinct neighborhoods separated by Penn Avenue , "Point Breeze" is also frequently taken to include North Point Breeze . Point Breeze has six borders, five with the Pittsburgh neighborhoods of North Point Breeze to the north, Regent Square to the southeast, Squirrel Hill South to the south and southwest, Squirrel Hill North to the west, and Shadyside to the northwest. The other border is with the borough of Wilkinsburg to the east. Point Breeze also runs catty-corner (without a direct border) with the Pittsburgh neighborhood of Larimer to the north at the intersection of Penn and Fifth Avenues (This intersection also serves as an east–west "diagonal" for the Pittsburgh neighborhoods of Shadyside and North Point Breeze). The eastern edge of the neighborhood, north of Regent Square and east of Frick Park , comprises the neighborhood of Park Place . The Shady Side Academy Junior School sits here, as does Environmental Charter School , a Pittsburgh Public School that operates as a charter school in the building originally known as Park Place School . Malcolm James McCormick (January 19, 1992 – September 7, 2018), known professionally as Mac Miller. David McCullough (July 7, 1933 – August 7, 2022), noted historian and author, two-time winner of the Pulitzer Prize , was born and raised in Point Breeze. List of Pittsburgh neighborhoods Toker, Franklin (1994) [1986]. Pittsburgh: An Urban Portrait . Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press . ISBN 0-8229-5434-6 . Frick Art & Historical Center

East Liberty is a neighborhood in Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania 's East End. It is bordered by Highland Park , Morningside , Stanton Heights , Garfield , Friendship , Shadyside and Larimer , and falls largely within Pittsburgh City Council District 9, with a few areas in District 8. One of the most notable features in the East Liberty skyline is the East Liberty Presbyterian Church , which is an area landmark. Around the time of the American Revolution , East Liberty was a free grazing area in Allegheny County located a few miles east of the young, growing town called Pittsburgh. (In older English usage, a "liberty" was a plot of common land on the outskirts of a town.) Two farming patriarchs owned much of the nearby land, and their descendants' names grace streets in and around East Liberty today. John Conrad Winebiddle owned land west of present-day East Liberty, in what are now Bloomfield , Garfield , and Friendship , and his daughter Barbara inherited a portion close to what is now East Liberty. Alexander Negley owned a farm called "Fertile Bottom" north of present-day East Liberty along the southern bank of the Allegheny River . Negley's land included some of present-day East Liberty and much of nearby Highland Park , Morningside , Larimer , and Stanton Heights . Alexander Negley's son Jacob married Barbara Winebiddle, built a manor house, and developed a village that he called East Liberty after the old grazing commons. In 1816, Negley saw to it that the Pittsburgh - Greensburg turnpike was built through East Liberty, which made the area a trading center and ensured its future growth. East Liberty truly began to develop as a commercial area in 1843, when Jacob's daughter Sarah Jane Negley married the ambitious lawyer Thomas Mellon . Mellon had first visited the area of modern-day East Liberty in 1823, when as a 10-year-old he saw the Negley mansion for the first time and decided he wanted something like it. He achieved this goal and much more: after first becoming a prosperous lawyer, he made his true fortune by marrying Sarah Jane Negley, selling or renting the land near East Liberty that she inherited, and using the proceeds to finance Pittsburgh's nascent industries. Like Jacob Negley before him, Thomas Mellon worked to make East Liberty a transportation hub: Mellon convinced some of Pittsburgh's first trolley lines to pass through East Liberty. East Liberty developed more or less independently of Pittsburgh until the Pennsylvania Railroad opened the East Liberty station in the 1850s. This passenger depot served to connect East Liberty to the city; twenty-six trains transported people to and from downtown on a daily basis. The rail connection was of crucial importance for the area's future development, because Pittsburgh was just about to enter its industrial boom period that would last between the end of the Civil War and World War I. As the city's population swelled to fuel the burgeoning iron and steel industry, East Liberty grew too. The neighborhood's population increased from under 1,000 in 1850 to over 46,000 by 1910. East Liberty acted as a first-ring residential suburb for elite families looking to escape the industrial smoke and soot of the city. By the turn of the century, it was one of the richest suburbs in America, containing many of the wealthy industrialists’ mansions. However, East Liberty was not exclusively an elite, Anglo-American neighborhood. The East Liberty Station brought floods of European immigrants and African American migrants from the South, who were drawn by Pittsburgh's manufacturing and industrial jobs. The neighborhood became home to an impressive number of churches for various religions and ethnicities by the late nineteenth century. There were separate places of worship for German and Italian Protestants, Irish, Italian and German Catholics, as well as a Presbyterian church for Anglo-Americans and an AME church for African Americans. East Liberty's diverse mix of Italian, Anglo-American, German, African-American, Jewish, Polish, Greek, and Irish residents stayed intact until after World War II. On June 30, 1868, the City of Pittsburgh annexed Collins and Liberty townships, which together included East Liberty. Thanks to its favorable location and Mellon's guiding hand, East Liberty became a thriving commercial center in the following years. East Liberty's merchants served many of Pittsburgh's industrial millionaires, who settled in nearby Shadyside and Point Breeze . Professionals in Highland Park and Friendship and laborers in Bloomfield and Garfield also shopped in East Liberty. There were four movie theaters. Actor-singer Dick Powell got his start singing at the Enright Theater. By 1950, the area was a bustling and fully urban marketplace, anchored by Sears-Roebuck store on Highland Avenue and (Albert J )Mansmann's Department Store on Penn Avenue. It had become the largest, in terms of sales dollars, non-center-city business district in the country. East Liberty's decline was precipitated by a series of government policies relating to the underwriting of mortgages for homes commonly referred to as redlining . The residential areas immediately surrounding East Liberty's main business district consisted primarily of tightly packed wood frame homes built in the mid-to-late 1800s. . In 1937, The George F Cram Company undertook the creation of federally sponsored surveys and maps which ultimately became the 'redlined' maps used by banks for underwriting. The Cram Maps listed this housing stock as "obsolete," noted the "infiltration of Jews... and Negroes" , and the large number of people on relief (the New Deal version of Welfare) as justification for redlining the area. The result of this redlining was two-fold; first, it made accessing conventional forms of credit for home purchases and renovations difficult; and second, it fostered segregation of low income minorities in a neighborhood that was clearly racially diverse in 1937. Because most real estate is purchased with a mortgage, and banks would not lend against properties in redlined areas, most prospective buyers could not buy homes in the area at competitive prices, causing an artificial collapse of demand and property value. Without capital to fund repairs and renovations, homes in poor repair deteriorated over time. Indeed, when urban renewal's blight remediation via demolition was undertaken in the 1960s, the areas redlined in 1937 were those designated as blighted, and razed. The residential neighborhoods north of the redlined areas were not immune to the impact of redlining. The larger brick four-square homes built in the first 20 years of the 20th Century were interspersed with the estates of Pittsburgh's wealthy. However, the George F. Cram surveys noted "...negro encroachment threatening], calling it an obsolete, "...mediocre section of East Liberty."], and designated it as a higher risk for lenders. Though this area of the neighborhood declined in tandem with the greater East Liberty neighborhood, it was spared the greater destruction of Urban Renewal. Two decisions in the 1960s exacerbated the trends begun with redlining. The first was an attempt to halt a slow trickle of businesses from the City to the suburbs. In the early 1960s, a few of East Liberty's larger merchants saw that some residents of Pittsburgh's East End were moving to the suburbs, and that suburban shopping malls were consequently growing and expanding. These merchants feared that suburban development would harm East Liberty's status as a market center, and asked the City of Pittsburgh's Urban Redevelopment Authority (URA) to take action. The URA proposed creating an outdoor pedestrian mall on Penn Avenue, to be surrounded by car-friendly roads on which large stores, surrounded by parking lots, could serve shoppers just as the new suburban stores were doing. This plan required the demolition of roughly half of the 254 ac (103 ha) that comprised East Liberty. As noted previously, the area targeted for demolition roughly aligned with those parts of the neighborhood redlined in 1937. After some contentious debate, the plan was approved, and the URA stopped traffic on the busiest part of Penn Avenue (the old Greensburg-Pittsburgh turnpike of Jacob Negley's day) and routed it onto a series of new, one-way thoroughfares (called Penn Circle) that formed a ring around the central business district. Many small shops were destroyed—a million square feet of retail space in all. These demolitions destroyed the dense, walkable commercial district and replaced much of it with unattractive parking lots and vacant properties, hastening the decline of the businesses that remained. While the URA was remaking the street plan of East Liberty, the City of Pittsburgh's housing authority made a second set of changes to the neighborhood. Housing authority planners noted that the nearby African-American neighborhood of Homewood was overcrowded, largely as a result of the URA's earlier demolition of the lower Hill District to create the Civic Arena , which had forced many of the Hill's African-Americans out and into the North Side and Homewood . The housing authority's solution was to build three large housing complexes, each close to 20 stories tall, in East Liberty along the new Penn Circle roads. These two measures ultimately failed to preserve East Liberty as a market center, and arguably hastened the old neighborhood's demise. By routing cars away from Penn Avenue, the URA's new street plan seemed to send a message that the neighborhood's commercial center was not worth visiting. The housing authority's massive housing complexes quickly developed a reputation as centers for crime, and this reputation likely did as much as the confusing street plan to drive commerce away from East Liberty. Redlining had already driven away middle class homebuyers, and the public housing complexes were exclusively for low-income renters. This created population demographics that were severely poor and unable to support a healthy commercial sector. Urban renewal had devastating consequences for the neighborhood. There were some 575 businesses in East Liberty in 1959 but only 292 in 1970 and just 98 in 1979. The businesses that remained tended not to serve the majority of nearby Pittsburghers, but only the captive audience that remained in what was now an urban ghetto. Steep population decline followed urban renewal. East Liberty became a segregated neighborhood with high poverty rates, low rates of homeownership, and a legacy of disinvestment that continued well after the Community Reinvestment Act eliminated redlining. In the past 20 years, the population fell from 7,973 in 1990 to 6,871 in 2000, and 5,698 in 2016. The reason for this is both the lingering effects of urban renewal and redlining. A 2018 study of demographic changes in East Liberty suggests that abandonment due to poor property condition drove the bulk of population change in East Liberty. Evidence of previous widespread abandonment exists both in the form of vacant lots which once held homes and in the presence of new homes and apartments built on previously vacant lots. East Liberty business district along Penn Avenue. In the three decades following 1980, East Liberty has slowly regained its status as a market destination for shoppers. In 1979, Mellon Bank, Pittsburgh National Bank, local property owners and other businesses created a nonprofit community development corporation, East Liberty Development, Inc. (ELDI). and hired an executive director, David Feehan. During the 1980s, a number of important developments occurred, spearheaded by ELDI, which acquired and renovated a vacant hotel (now 100 Sheridan Square); purchased the block that included the Regent Theater and Penn Highland Building; and worked with developers to bring the first market rate condo to the community and a new shopping center called East Liberty Station on Penn Avenue, east of Penn Circle. During the 1980s, the collection of small shops on Penn Circle South expanded, more than 200 businesses located in East Liberty, and more than $80 million was invested in real estate development. In the fifteen years following its founding, ELDI focused on rehabilitating some of the East Liberty's historic commercial spaces. These included the Regent Theater (now called the Kelly-Strayhorn Theater ) and Motor Square Garden . ELDI's rehabilitation projects were time-consuming, and they did not make the neighborhood the destination for shoppers that it had formerly been. For example, ELDI and the Massaro Corporation recreated the Motor Square Garden building as an indoor mall in 1988, but consumers did not respond. The American Automobile Association bought the building in bankruptcy court in 1991 and now uses it as office space. In addition to its moderately successful property rehabilitation efforts during the 1980s, ELDI was able to remove the failed pedestrian mall on Penn Avenue and return that thoroughfare to its traditional use as a two-way street . These successes set the stage for a large and somewhat controversial series of developments in the late 1990s and 2000s. Between 1996 and 2006, ELDI and the City of Pittsburgh worked to attract new “big box” retailers to East Liberty and to remove the 20-story housing projects that surrounded the neighborhood. First, ELDI and the City used tax increment financing to lure two national retailers to the neighborhood: Home Depot and Whole Foods. Both of these stores thrived, and their success convinced small local merchants and other national retailers to invest in the neighborhood. Second, after a complex and time-consuming set of transactions, two of the three housing projects that visually barricaded the neighborhood were demolished in 2005, and the third was demolished in May 2009. The EastSide development in East Liberty. Because these efforts involved resettling the largely African-American population of East Liberty's housing projects and attracting several high-end retailers, ELDI and the City have been criticized for acting as agents of Gentrification . Some of these concerns have been assuaged by new mixed-income residential developments which have begun to replace the demolished housing projects, as the new developments provide arguably nicer and safer accommodations for some of the projects’ former residents - but much fewer of them. By 2009, East Liberty more closely resembled the busy commercial neighborhood of 1959 than the struggling ghetto of 1979. Merchants continue to invest in the neighborhood, and outside observers consider it to be fully rehabilitated. In 2010, The New York Times published an article about the revival of East Liberty, and cited the presence of a Google office as a sign of the neighborhood's success. In 2011, the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette published an article entitled "The trend toward shared working areas arrives" which describes the creation of The Beauty Shoppe, East Liberty's first Coworking space. The space is owned by East Liberty Development Inc and currently houses several start ups and small businesses. The first business tenant was Thinktiv, Inc., a venture accelerator. Thinktiv was part of The Beauty Shoppe redevelopment effort alongside East Liberty Development Inc. and Edile, a real estate development firm. The Highland Building hi-rise, vacant for 20 years, has been converted into luxurious apartments, as has the adjacent Wallace Building, through Walnut Capital, a local real estate company that also owns part of Bakery Square. In April 2014, the streets making up Penn Circle were renamed, removing a highly visible reminder of the failed urban renewal plans of the 1960s. Several historic street names were restored, and Centre Avenue was extended beyond its original (pre-1968) terminus at Penn Avenue to East Liberty Boulevard, affording visitors to the neighborhood a less confusing path toward the business district. In June 2014, USA Today named East Liberty one of the ten best up and coming neighborhoods around the USA. East Liberty is served by the East Liberty station, also called the East Liberty Transit Center, on the Martin Luther King Jr. East Busway . This station was redeveloped in 2015. The publicly funded project aimed at transit-oriented development , placing residents and retail in close proximity to mass transit in order to encourage urban density and discourage automobile use. The transit center increases accessibility to the Martin Luther King Jr. East Busway that runs along the ravine where the Pennsylvania Railroad once ran. The busway connects Downtown with East End neighborhoods and eastern suburbs of Allegheny County. This $150 million project covers a total of 6 acres and added 3000 square feet of mixed-use commercial space. This project has been a catalyst for heated debates in the past three years about the lack of affordable housing in East Liberty. The project's tax abatement program, which is meant to encourage development in the East Liberty transit district , has resulted in public funds being granted to private developers for high-end development, including hundreds of luxury apartments. In 2009, the Remnant Choir from East Liberty's Mt. Ararat Baptist Church won second place, and $20,000 in prize money, in a national contest that was sponsored by Verizon Wireless , and was designed to find the "Best Church Choir in America." Legendary actor and dancer Gene Kelly was born in East Liberty in 1912. David Tepper , a business man, owner of the NFL 's Carolina Panthers and the MLS 's Charlotte FC lived in East Liberty. List of Pittsburgh neighborhoods The Bulletin (Pittsburgh) , a monthly community newspaper serving East Liberty Toker, Franklin (1994). Pittsburgh: An Urban Portrait . Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press . ISBN 0-8229-5434-6 . Stewart, Charlie. "Redeveloping East Liberty". {{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) Shady Ave, Spring 2006 Shady Ave- Redeveloping East Liberty East Liberty's Wall of Fame Interactive Pittsburgh Neighborhoods Map East Liberty Development, Inc. Historic pictures and schematics of the area's rail service East Liberty Presbyterian Church Kelly Strayhorn Theater New Transit hub story Historic American Buildings Survey (HABS) No. PA-6792, " East Liberty Presbyterian Church, 116 South Highland Avenue, Pittsburgh, Allegheny County, PA ", 5 photos, 1 photo caption page

The Mattress Factory is a contemporary art museum located in Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania . It was a pioneer of site-specific installation art and features permanent installations by artists Yayoi Kusama , James Turrell , and Greer Lankton . The museum's roof itself is a light art installation and part of Pittsburgh's Northside evening skyline. Barbara Luderowski purchased a derelict Stearns & Foster mattress warehouse in 1975. The museum achieved non-profit status in 1977. Over the next forty years, Luderowski would attract upcoming installation artists to fill its rooms. The Mattress Factory along with its neighbors City of Asylum and Randyland are credited with playing a role in Pittsburgh's revitalization. In 1975, artist and Mattress Factory founder Barbara Luderowski purchased a former Stearns & Foster mattress warehouse at 500 Sampsonia Way in Pittsburgh's Central Northside . Originally, she used the warehouse as a space to live, work and build a community of artists and intellectuals. The community grew and in 1977—after two years of hosting art exhibits and a small food co-op—the Mattress Factory was established as a legal non-profit educational and cultural corporation. Its first exhibition of installation art opened five years later on May 8, 1982, and the museum has since grown to be an integral part of the Pittsburgh arts community, known for its artist residency program, educational programming, and unique exhibitions. In 2008 then-Curator of Exhibitions Michael Olijnyk joined Luderowski in leading the museum as co-director. Over the years the Mattress Factory has acquired more properties for various purposes, including: 1414 Monterey Street, which became a new gallery space Two buildings on North Taylor Street that became artist residences 505 Jacksonia Street, which is now used as a parking lot for museum visitors, and the adjacent lot, which now houses Winifred Lutz's Garden Installation , 1993 516 Sampsonia Way, which opened as gallery space in Fall 2013 In September 2018, a report published in Pittsburgh's WESA detailed five employees' allegations of sexual misconduct and the mishandling of the situation by the Mattress Factory and its director, Michael Olijnyk. The complaint was filed with the National Labor Relations Board, and in early January 2019, a settlement was reached and the investigation was closed. As of 2024 , the Mattress Factory hosts 20 long-term installations. The following is a list: Official website

Central Northside is a neighborhood in the North Side of the city of Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania. It has a zip code of 15212, and has representation on Pittsburgh City Council by the council member for District 6 (Downtown/Northshore Neighborhoods). Originally known as "The Buena Vista Tract", it is densely filled with restored row houses, community gardens and tree lined streets and alleyways. In the late 19th century, Allegheny, Pennsylvania (later annexed by Pittsburgh) became known for its stately homes, occupied by some of the area's wealthy families. One such area became known as the Mexican War Streets . The Mexican War Streets were laid out in 1847, during the Mexican–American War , by William Robinson Jr. , ex-mayor of the city of Allegheny. Robinson, who contrary to some tellings did not actually serve in the war, subdivided his land and named the new streets after the war's battles and generals ( Buena Vista Street, Filson Way, Monterey Street, Palo Alto Street, Resaca Place, Sherman Avenue, Taylor Avenue). The Central Northside neighborhood has 4 distinct flights of city steps. In Central Northside, the Steps of Pittsburgh quickly connect pedestrians to public transportation and neighborhood schools. The O'Hern Street city steps connect residents to the Propel Northside charter school. Photo by Laura Zurowski. Central Northside has seven city neighborhood borders with Perry South to the north, Fineview to the northeast, East Allegheny to the southeast, Allegheny Center to the south, Allegheny West to the southwest, Manchester to the west and California-Kirkbride to the northwest. The 1979 sports/cult classic The Fish That Saved Pittsburgh used the neighborhoods southern border of North Avenue's gritty former "burlesque row" adjacent to the Garden Theater to depict Stockard Channing 's gypsy fortune teller characters office and residence. Thirty years later, in 2010, the Katherine Heigl film One for the Money uses the same exact buildings complete with Garden Theater marquee to once again depict a gritty inner city environment—though much of the characters and vice of the North Avenue corridor has been corrected, the structures still adapt well on the areas southern border. On 10 September 2012, the Central Northside Neighborhood Council (CNNC) voted to change the neighborhood's name to Allegheny City Central. However, according to an FAQ published by the CNNC in August 2012, the Council reported that official city maps would "probably not" reflect the name change and that the city planning department is "always very reluctant" to alter established names. The same document refers to the name change as a "branding initiative" which is part of a "new brand and marketing strategy". List of Pittsburgh neighborhoods City of Pittsburgh's Central Northside page Interactive Pittsburgh Neighborhoods Map Mexican War Streets Society Allegheny City Central


The Carnegie Science Center , soon to be The Daniel G. and Carole L. Kamin Science Center , is one of the four Carnegie Museums of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania . It is located in the Chateau neighborhood. It is located across the street from Acrisure Stadium . The Carnegie Science Center is the most visited museum in Pittsburgh, and is located along the Ohio River on the North Shore. It has four floors of interactive exhibits totaling over 400 exhibits, and attracts nearly 500,000 visitors each year. Among its attractions are the Buhl Planetarium (which features the latest in digital projection technology), the Rangos Giant Theater (promoted as "the biggest screen in Pittsburgh"), a physical home for some of Carnegie Mellon University ’s Robot Hall of Fame (in the lobby of the Rangos Giant Cinema), SportsWorks , the Miniature Railroad & Village , and the USS Requin (a World War II submarine ). According to Nicholas Efran, "The Carnegie Science Center has been a gathering place for kids and families for many years." However, currently there are many new exhibits that staff are "Not able to include because of the smaller size of the building" In June 2018, the museum's new wing opened, allowing the museum to host new and larger exhibits. In August 2021, the Pittsburgh Zoning Board of Adjustment extended the center's use of its 450-space parking lot until 2026, at which point it will need to significantly reduce the space number to 75 spaces to conform to zoning regulations . In October 2021, the center received funding from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) 's Communities for Immunity initiative because of its support of vaccine confidence in the Pittsburgh community. It used the $10,000 award to contribute to its COVID-19 vaccination awareness programs. In June of 2022, § Roboworld closed. Some of the inductees to the Robot Hall of Fame , such as C-3PO and R2-D2 from " Star Wars ", Maria from " Metropolis ", as well as HAL 9000 from " 2001: A Space Odyssey ", were moved to the Rangos Giant Cinema. The big, free-throw-shooting basketball robot was moved to the § SportsWorks facility. Andy Roid , the singing Robothespian that greets visitors, was moved to the Science Center’s main lobby. All other robots from the exhibit went into storage "until the Science Center decides what to do with it". Its predecessor was the Buhl Planetarium and Institute of Popular Science , which opened on October 24, 1939. The Buhl Planetarium was the fifth major planetarium in the United States , and was popular for several decades. However, by the 1980s it had begun to show signs of age. An expansion was ruled out, so the institute was relocated to the Chateau neighborhood. However, it became apparent to the Buhl Institute that the relocation efforts would require more staffing than they were able to provide. At this point, the Carnegie Institute (under the leadership of Robert Wilburn ) stepped in, showing interest in merging with the Buhl Institute. Both parties agreed to the merger in 1987. On October 5, 1989, construction began on the $40 million building, designed by local architect Tasso Katselas , which was renamed the Carnegie Science Center as a result of the merger. The Henry Buhl Jr. Planetarium and Observatory was reinvented in this new facility. The Center opened in October 1991. On January 23, 2024, the Carnegie Science Center announced that they received a 65 million dollar donation from Daniel G. and Carole L. Kamin. In honor of the donation they announced plans to rename the center to The Daniel G. and Carole L. Kamin Science Center Roboworld formerly at the Carnegie Science Center The Roboworld area was the second-floor attraction at the Carnegie Science Center until June 19, 2022. It was touted as "the world's largest permanent robotics exhibition", with more than 30 interactive displays featuring "all things robotic". Until it closed, the first robot encounter in Roboworld was Andy Roid , the Robothespian, an interactive , animatronic robot that introduced visitors to the concepts of robotic sensing, processing and acting. The area's other exhibits showcased different types of robots and videos about them. Roboworld was also home to famous robots such as R2D2, Hal9000, C-3PO, and Gort. The Robot Hall of Fame featured famous robots from science fiction films, television, and video games, such as R2-D2 , C-3PO , Data , the T-800 Terminator , R.O.B. , Maschinenmensch , Gort , Robby the Robot , Robot B-9 , HAL 9000 , and Huey, Dewey, and Louie from Silent Running . Highmark SportsWorks (formerly UPMC SportsWorks ) is one of the major, permanent exhibits of the Carnegie Science Center. It is one of larger science and sports exhibitions in the world, with over 30 interactive experiences in which visitors can participate. The main idea of SportsWorks is "to inspire learning and curiosity by uniting the experience of sports for every age level with the laws of science that controls sports." SportsWorks features three themed areas: Physics of Sports (exploring the science of balance, trajectory, center of gravity, momentum, etc.), LifeWorks (featuring information for keeping a healthy lifestyle), and Sports Challenge (demonstrating various physical activities present in many sports). The previous sponsor, UPMC , ended its sponsorship of SportsWorks in 2006. On November 13, 2008, the Carnegie Science Center unveiled plans for a new 12,000-square-foot (1,100 m ) SportsWorks, sponsored by Highmark . It reopened in the Fall of 2009. From October 8, 2007, until May 2008, SportsWorks housed the controversial exhibit BODIES... The Exhibition . At least one employee of the Carnegie Science Center left her job due to the implementation of this exhibit. A committee from Pittsburgh Regional Transit , then known as Port Authority, recommended in 2007 that the site be purchased and that SportsWorks be demolished to allow for construction of tracks for the North Shore Connector , an extension of Pittsburgh's light rail line to the North Side of Pittsburgh. The E-motion cone is a white-colored, inverted cone which sits atop the Science Center building. It is referred to as the Weather Cone and was designed by New York architect Shashi Caan and lighting designer Matthew Tanteri. It was installed in 2000 with a computerized lighting system. In 2008 a storm damaged the cone, thus it underwent upgrades to its lighting system with an addition of energy-efficient bulbs. At night, it is lit with different colors, signalling the weather forecast from WTAE-TV for the coming day. Miniature Railroad & Village Carnegie Museums of Pittsburgh List of museums in Pennsylvania Seddon Bennington - director of the museum from 1994 until 2002 List of science centers Official website

Point Breeze , or South Point Breeze , is a largely residential neighborhood in Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania , USA . The community was named after a tavern once located there. Like nearby Squirrel Hill , it contains a large Jewish population, but is still majority Catholic and contributes to a high percentage of students enrolled in Taylor Allderdice High School , Oakland Catholic High School , and Central Catholic High School . The most prominent feature of Point Breeze is Henry Clay Frick 's Clayton, which is a part of the 5.5-acre (2.2 ha) Frick Art & Historical Center . Nearby is St. Bede School, a Catholic school, and the Pittsburgh New Church School. It is also the home to two Pittsburgh Public Schools , Linden Academy elementary school and Sterrett Middle School , and the Reformed Presbyterian Theological Seminary . The neighborhood also hosts much open space, with Westinghouse Park , Mellon Park , the scenic Homewood Cemetery , as well as the northern edge of Frick Park within its borders. Pulitzer Prize winner Annie Dillard 's popular memoir , An American Childhood , is set in Point Breeze during the 1950s. As a child she attended Park Place Elementary . Both of John Edgar Wideman 's memoirs, Brothers and Keepers and Hoop Roots , use North Point Breeze's Westinghouse Park as a setting, as well as in his fictional Homewood Trilogy . Although officially distinct neighborhoods separated by Penn Avenue , "Point Breeze" is also frequently taken to include North Point Breeze . Point Breeze has six borders, five with the Pittsburgh neighborhoods of North Point Breeze to the north, Regent Square to the southeast, Squirrel Hill South to the south and southwest, Squirrel Hill North to the west, and Shadyside to the northwest. The other border is with the borough of Wilkinsburg to the east. Point Breeze also runs catty-corner (without a direct border) with the Pittsburgh neighborhood of Larimer to the north at the intersection of Penn and Fifth Avenues (This intersection also serves as an east–west "diagonal" for the Pittsburgh neighborhoods of Shadyside and North Point Breeze). The eastern edge of the neighborhood, north of Regent Square and east of Frick Park , comprises the neighborhood of Park Place . The Shady Side Academy Junior School sits here, as does Environmental Charter School , a Pittsburgh Public School that operates as a charter school in the building originally known as Park Place School . Malcolm James McCormick (January 19, 1992 – September 7, 2018), known professionally as Mac Miller. David McCullough (July 7, 1933 – August 7, 2022), noted historian and author, two-time winner of the Pulitzer Prize , was born and raised in Point Breeze. List of Pittsburgh neighborhoods Toker, Franklin (1994) [1986]. Pittsburgh: An Urban Portrait . Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press . ISBN 0-8229-5434-6 . Frick Art & Historical Center

The Pittsburgh Glass Center is a gallery, glass studio, and public-access school dedicated to teaching, creating and promoting studio glass art. It is located on Penn Avenue in the Friendship neighborhood of Pittsburgh . It has features works by Paul Joseph Stankard and classes taught by Dante Marioni , Davide Salvadore, and Cesare Toffolo. The origins of the Pittsburgh Glass Center date to 1991, when David Stephens, then visual-arts officer of the Pennsylvania Council on the Arts , approached glass artists Ron Desmett and Kathleen Mulcahy, then a professor at Carnegie Mellon University , about the idea of a center for studio glass. It was originally to have been the Elizabeth Glass Center in Elizabeth, Pennsylvania . However, by 1999, the plans had changed and the center was re-oriented to Pittsburgh. It was officially opened in 2001. The current facility in Friendship is LEED-certified . Its development has aided the growth of Garfield , especially with the adjacent Glass Lofts residential development. In fall 2010, the Pittsburgh Glass Center entered into talks with Pittsburgh Filmmakers / Pittsburgh Center for the Arts . By May 2011, the talks had failed, with the Pittsburgh Glass Center withdrawing from negotiations. In 2012, the Glass Center purchased residential housing adjacent to its main gallery space to be used as student and artist-in-residence housing . By 2012, the center had a $1 million budget, with 10 full-time employees.

Garfield is a neighborhood in the East End of the City of Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania , United States. Garfield is bordered on the South by Bloomfield and Friendship (at Penn Avenue ), on the West by the Allegheny Cemetery (at Mathilda Street), on the North by Stanton Heights (at Mossfield Street), and on the East by East Liberty (at Negley Avenue). Like many parts of Pittsburgh , Garfield is a fairly steep neighborhood, with north-south residential streets running at about a 20% incline from Penn Avenue at the bottom to Mossfield Street at the top. Garfield is divided into “the valley” and “the hilltop.” Garfield is part of District 9 on the Pittsburgh City Council, and is currently represented by Rev. Ricky Burgess. The Garfield neighborhood has 13 distinct flights of city steps - many of which are open and in a safe condition. In Garfield, the Steps of Pittsburgh quickly connect pedestrians to public transportation and the Penn Avenue business corridor and provide an easy way to access the Fort Pitt Playground and neighborhood parklets. The recently refurbished N Winebiddle Street city steps in Garfield. Photo by Laura Zurowski. Like nearby Bloomfield and Friendship , the land comprising modern-day Garfield was acquired by Casper Taub from the local Delaware tribe . Taub sold it to his son-in-law, Joseph Conrad Winebiddle, in the late 18th century. About a hundred years later, Winebiddle's descendants broke the family estate into lots and sold them to new residents of an expanding City of Pittsburgh . The first owner of a lot in present-day Garfield bought his plot in 1881, on the day that U.S. President James Garfield was buried, so the neighborhood was named for the late President. Garfield's earliest settlers were predominantly blue-collar Irish laborers and their families, who worked in the mills and foundries down along the Allegheny River, shopped in local stores on Penn Avenue, and built and lived in modest brick foursquare homes on the streets running up from Penn Avenue. The community, then almost exclusively Catholic, built St. Lawrence O'Toole Parish on Penn Avenue in 1897. From 1880 until about 1960, the neighborhood remained as it began: a solid, working-class area. Neighborhood activist Aggie Brose described Garfield in 1960 as a place where "You sponsored each other's kids, you went to all the weddings and funerals, you never wanted for a baby-sitter, you never had to call a repairman, you didn't need for a social. When you put the kids to bed, the women went out on the stoops." Things changed in the 1960s, when some Garfield residents began to leave the City for nearby suburbs in Shaler and Penn Hills. In response, the City's Urban Redevelopment Authority (URA) used eminent domain and attempted to change nearby East Liberty from an urban shopping area, then the third-busiest retail center in Pennsylvania, to a suburban one. The URA knocked down many small shops, accessible on foot or by bus, and thereby opened land for larger ones, accessible by car. At the same time, the City's housing authority built several massive public housing complexes on Garfield's borders: Garfield Heights, a 600+ unit complex high up on Fern Street, and the East Mall, a 20+ story tower straddling Penn Avenue at the entrance to East Liberty. These changes, designed to halt the slow trickle of Garfield residents to the suburbs, instead turned a trickle into a torrent. East Liberty lost most of its businesses, and the new housing projects, inhabited by poor African-Americans, unnerved Garfield residents. In 1969 the federal government gave the City funds to enforce housing codes in Garfield so that as old residents fled, their homes were not allowed to deteriorate. This move also backfired: long-time residents, told that homes built in 1900 (and often passed through families over the years) did not meet codes written in 1960, moved away rather than pay for upgrades. Thus began a textbook case of white flight : in 1970, Garfield had a population of roughly 10,000 people, 80% of them white. In 2000, Garfield's population had been cut almost in half to 5,450 people, 83% of them black. To halt what they perceived as the neighborhood's decline, in 1975 parishioners at St. Lawrence O'Toole founded the Bloomfield-Garfield Corporation (BGC), a Community Development Corporation that uses private and government funds and activism to encourage home ownership and business development. Over the years, the organization has built or renovated dozens of housing units, and renovated commercial properties for dozens of small businesses, from restaurants to art galleries to theater companies. In the 1980s, a similar group called the Garfield Jubilee Association formed, with a goal of creating affordable housing. In recent years, the two groups have joined together in a joint project to build dozens of new single-family homes. In 2000, the BGC and Friendship Development Associates, Inc. formed the Penn Avenue Arts Initiative. The PAAI encourages artists to live and work along the Avenue by rehabbing properties, making small loans or grants for facade renovations, and organizing joint marketing events such as Unblurred, held the first Friday of each month, where the venues of Garfield and Friendship open for special events. Efforts by groups like these, along with a recent recognition that massive, 1960s-style social welfare projects often had negative consequences, have helped to revitalize the neighborhood. Commercially, Penn Avenue is recovering from the flight of local businesses in the 1970s and 1980s. Some bastions of the old neighborhood remain, as groups like the BGC and GJA, and FDA have worked to keep some banks and stores along Penn Avenue. Since 1990, these have been joined by newcomers: African-American barbershops and salons, tiny family-owned Vietnamese restaurants, and a series of arts-related businesses (e.g., theatres, galleries, an architecture studio, a glass factory, a coffeeshop, and much more) attracted by the PAAI. There has also been some positive residential development: the East Mall and Garfield Heights Senior highrise was razed in 2005, and the townhouse units are scheduled to be demolished in 2007–2008, and replaced with mixed-income units, as well as new replacement homes scattered through the neighborhood. Visitors to Garfield today will see a neighborhood on the rise, a formerly blighted community that is now becoming a vibrant community, with a focus on the arts, while not forgetting its roots ( [1] ). The Bulletin (Pittsburgh) , a monthly community newspaper serving Garfield List of Pittsburgh neighborhoods Pittsburgh Glass Center Toker, Franklin (1994) [1986]. Pittsburgh: An Urban Portrait . Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press. ISBN 0-8229-5434-6 . Media related to Garfield (Pittsburgh) at Wikimedia Commons

Randyland is an art museum in the North Side section of Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania . It is widely regarded as one of America 's most colorful public art landmarks. Randy Gilson is the founder of this museum, which showcases found object art. Randyland has played an important role in the cultural rejuvenation of Pittsburgh, with its neighbors City of Asylum and Mattress Factory . Randyland has received international attention through viral listicles , and is among the most photographed places on Instagram . Randy Gilson talking to visitors at Randyland Randy Gilson was born in Homestead, Pennsylvania . Early in life he suffered from homelessness and poverty. He moved to Pittsburgh's Northside in 1982, where he was a community activist , planting over 800 street gardens and 50 vegetable gardens. His guerrilla gardening planted vacant lots in Manchester , the Mexican War Streets , and surrounding neighborhoods. He bought the property that would become Randyland on a credit card for $10,000 in 1995. Using upcycling, Gilson decorates his home with items such as mannequins, plastic dinosaurs and pink flamingos. The fences display murals with neighbors dancing and smiling. In late 2016, Gilson's partner David Paul Francis "Mac" McDermott was diagnosed with terminal prostate cancer . Upon hearing the news, Randyland fans raised over $20,000 and sent Gilson and McDermott on their first vacation. The couple visited the Grand Canyon and Hollywood . Afterwards, Gilson retired from his restaurant job to spend more time with the ailing McDermott. Following the announcement, Foo Conner joined Randyland as co-director. The neighborhood around the museum experienced explosive growth in 2016-2019. Randyland itself reportedly doubled in attendance. The courtyard was overhauled to accommodate the traffic. Under Conner's curation, the facility embraced being a selfie museum as a vibrant backdrop for photos. McDermott died on January 10, 2019. As Gilson's partner, he was posthumously given the title of co-founder. Journalists noted that McDermott may have downplayed his role when alive but was a backbone of the museum. Later that year, Randyland received the Mayor's Award for Public Art for 2019. Conner left the museum early 2020. Because it is outdoors, Randyland was one of the only art museums open in Pennsylvania during the COVID-19 pandemic . Gilson came out of retirement. The Courtyard was changed to a socially distanced playground throughout quarantine. Many of the original murals have been painted over. As of 2022, Randyland is still a free and popular tourist attraction. The documentary The Spirit of Pittsburgh features Randy Gilson's gardening alongside Fred Rogers . The documentary Pursuing Happiness features Randy Gilson as one of the happiest people in America. When a blizzard postponed Guster 's Pittsburgh concert, they instead recorded a viral music video in the alleyway near Randyland. Randy Gilson succeeded Rick Sebak as the Mardi Gras King of Pittsburgh. A teenager's "Summer Bucket List 2017", which included Randyland as a place to visit, went viral. Anthony Bourdain: Parts Unknown calls Randyland an essential for the "Perfect Day in Pittsburgh". The popular travel show Rediscovering America presented by Barstool Sports interviewed Randy Gilson at Randyland in their 2022 episode about Pittsburgh. Mayor's Award for Public Art 2019 Official website

Adolf Wölfli 's Irren-Anstalt Band-Hain , 1910 Anna Zemánková , No title, 1960s Outsider art is art made by self-taught individuals who are untrained and untutored in the traditional arts with typically little or no contact with the conventions of the art worlds . The term outsider art was coined in 1972 as the title of a book by art critic Roger Cardinal . It is an English equivalent for art brut ( French: [aʁ bʁyt] , "raw art" or "rough art"), a label created in the 1940s by French artist Jean Dubuffet to describe art created outside the boundaries of official culture. Dubuffet focused particularly on art by those on the outside of the established art scene, using as examples psychiatric hospital patients, hermits, and spiritualists. Outsider art has emerged as a successful art marketing category; an annual Outsider Art Fair has taken place in New York since 1993, and there are at least two regularly published journals dedicated to the subject. The term is sometimes applied as a marketing label for art created by people who are outside the mainstream "art world" or "art gallery system", regardless of their circumstances or the content of their work. A more specific term, " outsider music ", was later adapted for musicians. Interest in the art of the mentally ill, along with that of children and the makers of " peasant art ", developed from the end of the 19th century onward, both by psychiatrists such as Cesare Lombroso , Auguste Marie or Marcel Réjà, and by artists, such as members of " Der Blaue Reiter " group: Wassily Kandinsky , August Macke , Franz Marc , Alexej von Jawlensky , and others. What the artists perceived in the work of these groups was an expressive power born of their perceived lack of sophistication. Examples of this were reproduced in 1912 in the first and only issue of their publication, Der Blaue Reiter Almanac . During World War I , Macke was killed at Champagne in 1914 and Marc was killed at Verdun in 1916; the gap left by these deaths was to some extent filled by Paul Klee , who continued to draw inspiration from these 'primitives'. Interest in the art of insane asylum inmates continued to grow in the 1920s. In 1921, Dr. Walter Morgenthaler published his book Ein Geisteskranker als Künstler ( A Psychiatric Patient as Artist ) about Adolf Wölfli , a psychotic mental patient in his care. Wölfli had spontaneously taken up drawing, and this activity seemed to calm him. His most outstanding work was an illustrated epic of 45 volumes in which he narrated his own imaginary life story. With 25,000 pages, 1,600 illustrations, and 1,500 collages, it is a monumental work. Wölfli also produced a large number of smaller works, some of which were sold or given as gifts. His work is on display at the Adolf Wölfli Foundation in the Museum of Fine Art , Bern . A defining moment was the publication of Bildnerei der Geisteskranken ( Artistry of the Mentally Ill ) in 1922, by Hans Prinzhorn . This was the first formal study of psychiatric works, based upon a compilation of thousands of examples from European institutions. The book and the art collection gained much attention from avant-garde artists of the time, including Paul Klee, Max Ernst , and Jean Dubuffet . People with some formal artistic training as well as well-established artists are not immune from mental illness, and may also be institutionalized. For example, William Kurelek , later awarded the Order of Canada for his artistic life work, as a young man was admitted to the Maudsley Psychiatric Hospital where he was treated for schizophrenia . In the hospital he painted, producing The Maze , a dark depiction of his tortured youth . He was transferred from the Maudsley to Netherne Hospital from November 1953 to January 1955, to work with Edward Adamson (1911–1996), a pioneer of art therapy , and creator of the Adamson Collection. View inside the Collection de l'art brut museum, Lausanne French artist Jean Dubuffet was particularly struck by Bildnerei der Geisteskranken and began his own collection of such art, which he called art brut or raw art . In 1948 he formed the Compagnie de l'Art Brut along with other artists, including André Breton and Claude Lévi-Strauss . The collection he established became known as the Collection de l'art brut and the curator was Slavko Kopač for almost three decades. It contains thousands of works and is now permanently housed in Lausanne , Switzerland. Dubuffet characterized art brut as: Those works created from solitude and from pure and authentic creative impulses – where the worries of competition, acclaim and social promotion do not interfere – are, because of these very facts, more precious than the productions of professionals. After a certain familiarity with these flourishings of an exalted feverishness, lived so fully and so intensely by their authors, we cannot avoid the feeling that in relation to these works, cultural art in its entirety appears to be the game of a futile society, a fallacious parade. — Jean Dubuffet, "Place à l'incivisme" (December 1987 – February 1988). Dubuffet argued that 'culture', that is mainstream culture, managed to assimilate every new development in art, and by doing so took away whatever power it might have had. The result was to asphyxiate genuine expression. Art brut was his solution to this problem – only art brut was immune to the influences of culture, immune to being absorbed and assimilated, because the artists themselves were not willing or able to be assimilated. Dubuffet's championing of Art Brut would not last long. Scholars argue Dubuffet's distaste for the mainstream art world helped ensure that art brut and the Compagnie de l'Art Brut would not survive on a commercial basis. Dubuffet would kill art brut as he defined it in his quest for its authenticity. Three years after the Compagnie de l'Art Brut was formed, Dubuffet dissolved it, caving in to form the more conventional Collection de l'art brut afterward. The interest in "outsider" practices among twentieth-century artists and critics can be seen as part of a larger emphasis on the rejection of established values within the modernist art milieu. The early part of the 20th century gave rise to Cubism and the Dada , Constructivist , and Futurist movements in art, all of which involved a dramatic movement away from cultural forms of the past. Dadaist Marcel Duchamp , for example, abandoned "painterly" technique to allow chance operations a role in determining the form of his works, or simply to recontextualize existing "ready-made" objects as art. Mid-century artists, including Pablo Picasso , looked outside the traditions of high culture for inspiration, drawing from the artifacts of "primitive" societies, the unschooled art made by children, and vulgar advertising graphics. Dubuffet's championing of the art brut – of the insane and others at the margins of society – is yet another example of avant-garde art challenging established cultural values. As with analysis of these other art movements, current discourse indicates art brut is innately tied to primitivism due to its similarity in its borrowing of personal "de-patriation" and exoticization of familiar yet alien forms. A number of terms are used to describe art that is loosely understood as "outside" of official culture . Definitions of these terms vary and overlap. The editors of Raw Vision , a leading journal in the field, suggest that "Whatever views we have about the value of controversy itself, it is important to sustain creative discussion by way of an agreed vocabulary". Consequently, they lament the use of "outsider artist" to refer to almost any untrained artist. "It is not enough to be untrained, clumsy or naïve. Outsider Art is virtually synonymous with Art Brut in both spirit and meaning, to that rarity of art produced by those who do not know its name." Art Brut: Coined by Jean Dubuffet, the term translated literally from French means "raw art". 'Raw' is analogous in that it has not been through the academic 'cooking' process: i.e. the world of art schools, galleries, and museums. Dubuffet's original definition pertains strictly to the ‘raw art’ created by the autodidactic and shunned fringes of society. Folk art : Folk art originally suggested crafts and decorative skills associated with peasant communities in Europe – though presumably it could equally apply to any indigenous culture. It has broadened to include any product of practical craftsmanship and decorative skill – everything from chain-saw animals to hub-cap buildings. A key distinction between folk and outsider art is that folk art typically embodies traditional forms and social values, where outsider art stands in some marginal relationship to society's mainstream. Intuitive art / Visionary art : Raw Vision Magazine ' s preferred general terms for outsider art. It describes them as deliberate umbrella terms. However, visionary art, unlike other definitions here can often refer to the subject matter of the works, which includes images of a spiritual or religious nature. Intuitive art is probably the most general term available. Intuit: The Center for Intuitive and Outsider Art based in Chicago operates a museum dedicated to the study and exhibition of intuitive and outsider art. The American Visionary Art Museum in Baltimore, Maryland is dedicated to the collection and display of visionary art. Marginal art/Art singulier: Essentially the same as Neuve Invention ; refers to artists on the margins of the art world. Naïve art : Another term commonly applied to untrained artists who aspire to "normal" artistic status, i.e. they have a much more conscious interaction with the mainstream art world than do outsider artists. Neuve invention : Used to describe artists who, although marginal, have some interaction with mainstream culture. They may be doing art part-time for instance. The expression was coined by Dubuffet too; strictly speaking, it refers only to a special part of the Collection de l'art brut . Visionary environments : Buildings and sculpture parks built by visionary artists – ranging from decorated houses to large areas incorporating a large number of individual sculptures with a tightly associated theme. Examples include Watts Towers by Simon Rodia , Buddha Park and Sala Keoku by Bunleua Sulilat , and The Palais idéal by Ferdinand Cheval . Philosophy portal Society portal Fashion portal LGBTQ portal Raw Vision Magazine – International art magazine devoted to outsider art Gricha-rosov.com ( Archived 2016-05-23 at the Portuguese Web Archive) – Rich database and presentation of international outsider artists (in French language, but has extensive illustrations) Outsider Artists in the Collection of Museum of Naive and Marginal Art (MNMA) Jagodina Serbia ( Archived 2022-11-12 at the Wayback Machine ) Russian outsider art from the Bogemskaja-Turchin collection Outsider Art news , wire, and announcements Collection: "Folk, Self-Taught, Amateur, and Visionary Art" at the University of Michigan Museum of Art

Contemporary Craft ( CC ), which was previously known as the Society for Contemporary Craft , presents contemporary art in craft media such as ceramics, metals, fiber, glass, wood, and mixed media by international, national, and regional artists. In 2020, CC relocated from The Strip District to its permanent location on Butler Street in the Lawrenceville neighborhood in Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania , United States . The organization offers exhibitions focusing on multi-cultural diversity and social justice., artist-led, hands-on workshops, and a store featuring handcrafted art objects by artists from across the United States. CC is free admission and open to the public. Between three and four exhibits are displayed annually in CC's main gallery and bring in approximately 35,000 visitors. Another 100,000 visit the Satellite Gallery at One Mellon Center that was opened in 1990. This second gallery is located in the Pittsburgh Steel Plaza T-station and allows those working downtown the opportunity to experience art. CC is nonprofit, aiming to bring arts to the community. It provides as much free access and programs as possible. In addition to the current exhibits and various studio workshops, CC reaches out into the community and focuses on at-risk youth, seniors in assisted living, and those living in homeless shelters. CC was founded in 1971 by Elizabeth Rockwell Raphael in the belief that contemporary artists had new things to say with traditional materials, and that they needed wider opportunities to exhibit and sell their work. Since then, CC has organized more than 230 exhibitions and has established a satellite gallery and a permanent collection. CC also offers a range of studio classes, community outreach programs, and a retail store. Elizabeth “Betty” Rockwell Raphael, who has been called one of the most groundbreaking women in the arts was the first to transform the Pittsburgh arts scene. Before its foundation in 1971, Raphael opened a small art gallery in 1941 making the first modern art gallery Pittsburgh had ever seen. She introduced a new vision of art to the city and created what is now one of the only organizations in the country that focuses solely on craft media. In 2010, CC was named a "Champion in Action" in the community arts category by Citizens Bank and WPXI-TV , and received a $25,000 grant for “offering cutting-edge exhibitions focused on multicultural diversity and non-mainstream art, as well as a range of classes and community outreach programs,” said Ralph J, Papa, Chairman of Citizens Bank of Pennsylvania. In 2018, CC received the Award of Distinction from American Craft Council . This award recognizes an organization, institution, corporation, or individual who has made significant contributions to the field of craft with a minimum of 25 years of service. CC was the first organization to receive this award in Pittsburgh, PA.

Stephen Collins Foster (July 4, 1826 – January 13, 1864), known as "the father of American music", was an American composer known primarily for his parlour and minstrel music during the Romantic period . He wrote more than 200 songs, including " Oh! Susanna ", " Hard Times Come Again No More ", " Camptown Races ", "Old Folks at Home" ("Swanee River") , " My Old Kentucky Home ", " Jeanie with the Light Brown Hair ", " Old Black Joe ", and " Beautiful Dreamer ", and many of his compositions remain popular today. Foster's parents, Eliza Tomlinson Foster and William Barclay Foster There are many biographies of Foster, but details differ widely. Among other issues, Foster wrote very little biographical information himself, and his brother Morrison Foster may have destroyed much information that he judged to reflect negatively upon the family. Foster was born on July 4, 1826, in Lawrenceville, Pennsylvania . His parents, William Barclay Foster and Eliza Clayland Tomlinson Foster , were of Ulster Scots and English descent. He had three older sisters and six older brothers. He attended private academies in Allegheny , Athens , and Towanda, Pennsylvania , and received an education in English grammar, diction, the classics, penmanship, Latin, Greek, and mathematics. Foster taught himself to play the clarinet, guitar, flute, and piano. In 1839, his brother William was serving his apprenticeship as an engineer at Towanda and thought that Stephen would benefit from being under the supervision of Henry Kleber (1816–1897), a German-born music dealer in Pittsburgh. Under Kleber, Stephen was exposed to music composition . Together the pair studied the work of Mozart , Beethoven , Weber , Mendelssohn and Schubert . The site of the Camptown Races – which would provide both the title and setting for events of one of Foster's best-known songs – was located 30 miles (48 km) from Athens and 15 miles (24 km) from Towanda. Foster's education included a brief period at Jefferson College in Canonsburg, Pennsylvania , now part of Washington & Jefferson College . His tuition was paid, but he had little spending money. He left Canonsburg to visit Pittsburgh with another student and did not return. House in Hoboken, New Jersey where Foster is believed to have written " Jeanie with the Light Brown Hair " in 1854 Foster married Jane Denny McDowell on July 22, 1850, and they visited New York and Baltimore on their honeymoon. Foster then returned to Pennsylvania and wrote most of his best-known songs: "Camptown Races" (1850), "Nelly Bly" (1850), "Ring de Banjo" (1851), "Old Folks at Home" (known also as "Swanee River", 1851), "My Old Kentucky Home" (1853), "Old Dog Tray" (1853), and "Jeanie with the Light Brown Hair" (1854), written for his wife Jane. Many of Foster's songs were used in the blackface minstrel shows popular at the time. He sought to "build up taste...among refined people by making words suitable to their taste, instead of the trashy and really offensive words which belong to some songs of that order". However, Foster's output of minstrel songs declined after the early 1850s, as he turned primarily to parlor music . Many of his songs had Southern themes , yet Foster never lived in the South and visited it only once, during his 1852 honeymoon. Available archival evidence does not suggest that Foster was an abolitionist. Foster's last four years were spent in New York City. There is little information on this period of his life, although family correspondence has been preserved. A Pittsburgh Press illustration of the original headstone on Stephen Foster's grave Foster became sick with a fever in January 1864. Weakened, it is possible he fell in his hotel in the Bowery and cut his neck; he may also have sought to take his own life. His writing partner George Cooper found him still alive but lying in a pool of blood. Foster died in Bellevue Hospital three days later at the age of 37. His leather wallet contained a scrap of paper that simply said, "Dear friends and gentle hearts", along with 37 cents in Civil War scrip and three pennies. Other biographers describe different accounts of his death. Historian JoAnne O'Connell speculates in her biography, The Life and Songs of Stephen Foster , that Foster may have killed himself. As O'Connell and musicologist Ken Emerson have noted, several of the songs Foster wrote during the last years of his life foreshadow his death, such as "The Little Ballad Girl" and "Kiss Me Dear Mother Ere I Die." Emerson says in his 2010 Stephen Foster and Co. that Foster's injuries may have been "accidental or self-inflicted". Telegram that communicated Stephen Foster's death addressed to his brother Morrison Foster The note inside Foster's wallet is said to have inspired Bob Hilliard 's lyric for " Dear Hearts and Gentle People " (1949). Foster was buried in the Allegheny Cemetery in Pittsburgh. After his death, Morrison Foster became his "literary executor". As such, he answered requests for copies of manuscripts, autographs, and biographical information. After his death, " Beautiful Dreamer ", one of the best-loved of his works, was posthumously published in 1864. Foster grew up in Lawrenceville, now a neighborhood of Pittsburgh, where many European immigrants had settled and were accustomed to hearing the music of the Italian, Scots-Irish , and German residents. He composed his first song when he was 14 and entitled it the "Tioga Waltz". The first song that he had published was "Open thy Lattice Love" (1844). He wrote songs in support of drinking, such as "My Wife Is a Most Knowing Woman", "Mr. and Mrs. Brown", and "When the Bowl Goes Round", while also composing temperance songs such as "Comrades Fill No Glass for Me" or "The Wife". Foster also authored many church hymns, although the inclusion of his hymns in hymnals ended by 1910. Some of the hymns are "Seek and ye shall find", "All around is bright and fair, While we work for Jesus", and "Blame not those who weep and sigh". Several rare Civil War-era hymns by Foster were performed by The Old Stoughton Musical Society Chorus, including "The Pure, The Bright, The Beautiful", "Over The River", "Give Us This Day", and "What Shall The Harvest Be?". He also arranged many works by Mozart , Beethoven , Donizetti , Lanner , Weber and Schubert for flute and guitar. Foster usually sent his handwritten scores directly to his publishers. The publishers kept the sheet music manuscripts and did not give them to libraries nor return them to his heirs. Some of his original, hand-written scores were bought and put into private collections and the Library of Congress . " My Old Kentucky Home " is the official state song of Kentucky, adopted by the General Assembly on March 19, 1928. Foster's songs, lyrics, and melodies have often been altered by publishers and performers. In 1957 Ray Charles released a version of "Old Folks at Home" that was titled "Swanee River Rock (Talkin’ ’Bout That River)", which became his first pop hit that November. In the 2000s " Old Folks at Home ", designated the official state song of Florida in 1935, came under attack for what some regarded as offensive terms in the song's lyrics. Changes were made to them with the approval of the Stephen Foster Memorial . The modified song was kept as the official state song, while " Florida (Where the Sawgrass Meets the Sky) " was added as the state anthem. A 1974 published collection, Stephen Foster Song Book; Original Sheet Music of 40 Songs (New York : Dover Publications, Inc.,) of Stephen Foster's popular songs was edited by musicologist Richard Jackson . Many early filmmakers selected Foster's songs for their work because his copyrights had expired and cost them nothing. Professor of Folklore and musician John Minton wrote a song titled "Stephen C. Foster's Blues". Walt Kelly recorded an a cappella rendition of Foster's "Old Dog Tray" on the 1956 album, Songs of the Pogo . Kelly regularly referenced "Old Dog Tray" as the theme song for his character, Beauregard Hound Dog, from his comic strip, Pogo . Erika M. Anderson, of the band EMA, refers to Foster's "Camptown Races" in the song "California", from past Life Martyred Saints (2011): "I bet my money on the bobtail nag/somebody bet on the bay." The Firesign Theatre makes many references to Foster's compositions in their CD, Boom Dot Bust (1999, Rhino Records) Larry Kirwan of Black 47 mixes the music of Foster with his own in the musical Hard Times , which earned a New York Times accolade in its original run: "a knockout entertainment". Kirwan gives a contemporary interpretation of Foster's troubled later years and sets it in the tumultuous time of the New York draft riots and the Irish–Negro relations of the period. A revival ran at the Cell Theater in New York in early 2014, and a revised version of the musical called Paradise Square opened at Berkeley Repertory Theatre in 2018. Gordon Lightfoot wrote a song in 1970 titled "Your Love's Return (Song for Stephen Foster)" Randy Newman 's 1970 album 12 Songs contained Newman's song "Old Kentucky Home" (originally titled "Turpentine and Dandelion Wine"), which is based on Foster's " My Old Kentucky Home, Good-Night! " Newman told Billboard magazine, "It's a good song because Stephen Foster wrote the hook, that's why." Under various titles, Newman's "Old Kentucky Home" was covered by the Beau Brummels , the Alan Price Set and Johnny Cash . Spike Jones recorded a comedy send-up "I Dream of Brownie with the Light Blue Jeans". Humorist Stan Freberg imagined a 1950s style version of Foster's music in "Rock Around Stephen Foster" and, with Harry Shearer , had a sketch about Foster having writer's block in a bit from his "United States of America" project. Songwriter Tom Shaner mentions Stephen Foster meeting up with Eminem's alter ego "Slim Shady" on the Bowery in Shaner's song "Rock & Roll is A Natural Thing". The music of Stephen Foster was an early influence on the Australian composer Percy Grainger , who stated that hearing " Camptown Races " sung by his mother was one of his earliest musical recollections. He went on to write a piece entitled "Tribute to Foster", a composition for mixed choir, orchestra, and pitched wine glasses based on the melody of "Camptown Races". Art Garfunkel was cast as Stephen Foster and sang his songs in an elementary school play in Queens, New York Foster's name is included in the rapid fire litany of musicians and songs that make up the lyrics of the 1974 pop novelty song " Life Is a Rock (But the Radio Rolled Me) " by Reunion. Neil Sedaka wrote and recorded a song about Foster and released it on his 1975 album, The Hungry Years . Alternative country duo The Handsome Family 's song "Wildebeest", from their 2013 album Wilderness , is about Foster's death. Squirrel Nut Zippers wrote and recorded a song in 1998 titled "The Ghost of Stephen Foster". Stace England released in April 2024, as part of the group Foster's Satchel, a full-length album entitled Over the River: Stephen Foster Reimagined . Foster commemorative stamp in the Famous American Composers series, 1940 Two television shows about the life of Foster and his childhood friend (and later wife) Jane MacDowell were produced in Japan, the first in 1979 with 13 episodes, and the second from 1992 to 1993 with 52 episodes; both were titled Jeanie with the Light Brown Hair after the song of the same name. In the Honeymooners episode, "The $99,000 Answer", Ralph Kramden studies decades' worth of popular songs for his upcoming appearance on a television game show . Before each song, Ed Norton warms up on the piano by playing the opening to "Swanee River". On the program, Ralph is asked his first question for just 100 dollars: "Who is the composer of 'Swanee River'?" Ralph freezes, then nervously responds "Ed Norton?" and loses. In a "Fractured Fairy Tales" segment of The Rocky and Bullwinkle Show , Aladdin finds a lamp with a female genie with light brown hair , who immediately asks, "Are you Stephen Foster?" Lucille Ball, in an episode of The Lucy Show, announces that she is about to play a record called "Bing Crosby Sings Stephen Foster." A Crosby impressionist is heard singing (to the melody of "Camptown Races") "A-bum-bum-bum-bum bum-bum-bum, Stephen, Foster..." Three Hollywood films have been made of Foster's life: Harmony Lane (1935) with Douglass Montgomery , Swanee River (1939) with Don Ameche , and I Dream of Jeanie (1952), with Bill Shirley . The 1939 production was one of Twentieth Century Fox 's more ambitious efforts, filmed in Technicolor ; the other two were low-budget affairs made by B-movie studios. In the film Tombstone (1993), Billy Clanton (played by Thomas Haden Church ) tries to bait Doc Holliday ( Val Kilmer ), who is playing a Chopin nocturne on the piano, by saying, "Is that 'Old Dog Tray'? That sounds like 'Old Dog Tray' to me." When the goad fails, Clanton asks whether Doc knows any other songs, like "'Camptown Races?', 'Oh Susanna', "You know, Stephen stinkin' Foster?!?" In the film A Million Ways to Die in the West , Seth MacFarlane 's character, Albert can't get Foster's song "If You've Only Got a Mustache", from the previous scene, out of his head. Charlize Theron 's character suggests singing a different song, to which he replies, "There are only like 3 songs", and she adds "And they're all by Stephen Foster." In the 1949 film Mighty Joe Young the character Jill Young ( Terry Moore ) is able to calm her pet 12-foot-tall gorilla by whistling or playing " Beautiful Dreamer ". "Stephen Foster! Super Saturday" is a day of thoroughbred racing during the Spring/Summer meet at Churchill Downs in Louisville, Kentucky . During the call to the post, selections of Stephen Foster songs are played by the track bugler, Steve Buttleman. The day is headlined by the Stephen Foster Handicap , a Grade I dirt race for older horses at 9 furlongs. 36 U.S.C. §140 designates January 13 as Stephen Foster Memorial Day , a United States National Observance . In 1936, Congress authorized the minting of a silver half dollar in honor of the Cincinnati Musical Center. Foster was featured on the obverse of the coin. "Stephen Foster Music Camp" is a summer music camp held on EKU's campus of Richmond, Kentucky. The camp offers piano courses, choir, band, and orchestra ensembles. Stephen Foster sculpture in Schenley Plaza , Pittsburgh, by Giuseppe Moretti (1900) A public sculpture by Giuseppe Moretti honoring Foster and commemorating his song "Old Uncle Ned" sat in close proximity to the Stephen Foster Memorial until 2018. The statue was removed following complaints about the banjo-playing slave seated next to Foster. In Alms Park in Cincinnati , overlooking the Ohio River, there is a seated statue of him. The Hall of Fame for Great Americans in the Bronx , overlooking the Harlem River, has a bronze bust of him by artist Walker Hancock . Added in 1940, he is among only 98 honorees from 15 classes of distinguished men and women. In My Old Kentucky Home State Park in Bardstown, Kentucky , a musical, called The Stephen Foster Story has been performed since 1958. There is also a statue of him next to the Federal Hill mansion , where he visited relatives and which is the inspiration for My Old Kentucky Home . A painting by Howard Chandler Christy entitled, "Stephen Foster and the Angel of Genius" is on display in the park's art collection. The painting inspired Florence Foster Jenkins to author a tableau in which she personally plays the role of the angel depicted in Christy's painting. The scene was featured in the film Florence Foster Jenkins in 2016. Foster is depicted on the obverse of the 1936 Cincinnati Musical Center half dollar Foster is honored on the University of Pittsburgh campus with the Stephen Foster Memorial , a landmark building that houses the Stephen Foster Memorial Museum, the Center for American Music, as well as two theaters: the Charity Randall Theatre and Henry Heymann Theatre, both performance spaces for Pitt's Department of Theater Arts. It is the largest repository for original Stephen Foster compositions, recordings, and other memorabilia his songs have inspired worldwide. Two state parks are named in Foster's honor: the Stephen Foster Folk Culture Center State Park in White Springs, Florida , and Stephen C. Foster State Park in Georgia. Both parks are on the Suwannee River . Stephen Foster Lake at Mt. Pisgah State Park in Pennsylvania is named after him. One state park is named in honor of Foster's songs, My Old Kentucky Home State Park , a historic mansion formerly named Federal Hill, located in Bardstown, Kentucky , where Foster is said to have been an occasional visitor according to his brother, Morrison Foster. The park dedicated a bronze statue in honor of Stephen's work. The Lawrenceville (Pittsburgh) Historical Society, together with the Allegheny Cemetery Historical Association, hosts the annual Stephen Foster Music and Heritage Festival (Doo Dah Days!). Held the first weekend of July, Doo Dah Days! celebrates the life and music of one of the most influential songwriters in America's history. His home in the Lawrenceville section of Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania, still remains on Penn Avenue nearby the Stephen Foster Community Center . A 1900 statue of Foster by Giuseppe Moretti was located in Schenley Plaza , in Pittsburgh, from 1940 until 2018. On the unanimous recommendation of the Pittsburgh Art Commission, the statue was removed on April 26, 2018. Its new home has not yet been determined. It has a long reputation as the most controversial public art in Pittsburgh "for its depiction of an African-American banjo player at the feet of the seated composer. Critics say the statue glorifies white appropriation of black culture and depicts the vacantly smiling musician in a way that is at best condescending and at worst racist." A city-appointed Task Force on Women in Public Art called for the statue to be replaced with one honoring an African American woman with ties to the Pittsburgh community. The Task Force held a series of community forums in Pittsburgh to collect public feedback on the statue replacement and circulated an online form which allowed the public to vote for one of seven previously selected candidates or write in an alternate suggestion. However, the Task Force on Women in Public Art and the Pittsburgh Art Commission have not reached an agreement as to who will be commemorated or if the statue will stay in the Schenley Plaza location. The musicologist Ken Emerson has suggested the presence of racism in some of Foster's lyrics. Stephen Foster Collection and archive Emerson, Ken, ed. (2010). Stephen Foster & Co.: Lyrics of the First Great American Songwriters . New York: The Library of America. ISBN 978-1-59853-070-4 . OCLC 426803667 . Hamm, Charles (1983). Yesterdays: Popular Song in America . New York City: W. W. Norton & Co. ISBN 978-0393300628 . Hodges, Fletcher Jr. (1939). A Pittsburgh Composer and His Memorial . Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania: Historical Society of Western Pennsylvania. ASIN B01A8YVHHM . Hodges, Fletcher Jr. (1948). The Research Work of the Foster Hall Collection . Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. Hodges, Fletcher Jr. (1958). The Swanee River and a Biographical Sketch of Stephen Collins Foster . Whitefish, Montana: Literary Licensing. ISBN 978-1258193980 . Howard, John Tasker (March 1944). "The Literature on Stephen Foster". Notes: Quarterly Journal of the Music Library Association . 1 (2): 10–15. doi : 10.2307/891301 . JSTOR 891301 . Howard, John Tasker (1945). Stephen Foster: America's Troubadour . New York City: Tudor Publishing Company. ASIN B0007ELPPI . Milligan, Harold Vincent (1920). Stephen Collins Foster: A Biography Of America's Folk-Song Composer . Whitefish, Montana: Kessinger Publishing. ISBN 978-0548971864 . Morneweck, Evelyn (1973). Chronicles of Stephen Foster's Family . Associated Faculty Press. ISBN 978-0804617420 . O'Connell, JoAnne (2016). The Life and Songs of Stephen Foster: a Revealing Portrait of the Forgotten Man Behind Swanee River, Beautiful Dreamer, and My Old Kentucky Home . Lanham, Maryland: Rowman and Littlefield. p. 321. ISBN 9781442253865 . "Foster Hall Collection" . Center for American Music; University of Pittsburgh . Retrieved March 24, 2017 . "Pictorial Biography of Stephen Collins Foster" (PDF) . Musical Courier. 1930 . Retrieved March 24, 2017 . Free scores by Stephen Foster at the International Music Score Library Project (IMSLP) Works by or about Stephen Foster at the Internet Archive Stephen Foster at IMDb Stephen Foster at Find a Grave Archives of Stephen Foster at the University of Kentucky Stephen Foster discography at Discogs Pittsburgh Music History Archived March 21, 2019, at the Wayback Machine Hymns and songs by Stephen Foster Stephen Collins Foster recordings at the Discography of American Historical Recordings . Music scores Sheet music for "I see her still in my dreams" , Macon, GA: John C. Schreiner & Son, from the Confederate Imprints Sheet Music Collection Sheet music for "Parthenia to Incomar" , Macon, GA: John C. Schreiner & Son, from the Confederate Imprints Sheet Music Collection "The Melodies of Stephen C. Foster" (online version) Pittsburgh, PA: T.M. Walker, Full sheet music book, 307 pages

Carnegie Museum of Natural History
The Carnegie Museum of Natural History (abbreviated as CMNH) is a natural history museum in the Oakland neighborhood of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. It was founded by Pittsburgh-based industrialist Andrew Carnegie in 1896. Housing some 22 million specimens, the museum features one of the most extensive paleontological and entomological collections in the world.
As seen from the 36th floor of the Cathedral of Learning.
Description and history
The museum consists of 115,000 square feet (10,700 m2) organized into 20 galleries as well as research, library, and office space. It holds some 22 million specimens, of which about 10,000 are on view at any given time and about 1 million are cataloged in online databases. In 2008 it hosted 386,300 admissions and 63,000 school group visits. Museum education staff also actively engage in outreach by traveling to schools all around western Pennsylvania.
The museum gained prominence in 1899 when its scientists unearthed the fossils of Diplodocus carnegii.[1] Notable dinosaur specimens include one of the world's very few fossils of a juvenile Apatosaurus, the world's first specimen of a Tyrannosaurus rex,[2] and a recently identified species of oviraptorosaur named Anzu wyliei.[3]
Research teams including former Carnegie scientists made critical discoveries such as Puijila darwini, Castorocauda lutrasimilis, and Hadrocodium wui.
Other major exhibits include Hillman Hall of Minerals and Gems, Alcoa Foundation Hall of American Indians, Polar World: Wyckoff Hall of Arctic Life, Walton Hall of Ancient Egypt, Benedum Hall of Geology, Dinosaurs in Their Time, and Powdermill Nature Reserve, established by the museum in 1956 to serve as a field station for long-term studies of natural populations.
The museum's active curatorial departments are: Anthropology, Birds, Botany, Herpetology (Amphibians & Reptiles), Invertebrate Paleontology, Invertebrate Zoology, Mammals, Minerals, Mollusks (Malacology), and Vertebrate Paleontology. These departments work collaboratively under strategic centers created to re-frame how the museum leverages its research, exhibitions, and public programming to meet the challenges and issues of today. In late 2013, however, the museum's parent organization and interim administration eliminated multiple scientific positions, seriously reducing its capacity to conduct original research.

For more than 100 years, museum staff members have gone on expeditions, made discoveries, and contributed new insights to the scientific community while caring for one of the largest natural history collections in the country.

What's Cool at Carnegie Museum of Natural History
Carnegie Museum of Natural History is one of the top must-see destinations in Pittsburgh.
On a visit to CMNH, you’ll find yourself roaming the halls exploring parts of the world and history you never thought possible in Pittsburgh, PA. It makes for a great afternoon for the whole family! Of course, we all have our favorite parts of the museum to browse for hours on end.
Here are four can’t-miss experiences brought to you by the awesome personalities at CMNH.
Dinosaurs
It’s a little-known fact that Pittsburgh loves its dinosaurs. In fact, finding all the hidden dinos in town is a fun game for visitors!
CMNH is home to three original fossils of the most famous dinosaurs, which are on display in Dinosaurs in Their Time, as well as dozens of other original fossils from the Mesozoic Era. The paleontology team at CMNH is world-class, with new discoveries like Tratayenia rosalesi, a predator discovered in Patagonia, and Thanos... that’s right, Thanos:
Play
Fun Fact: Head paleontologist Matt Lamanna is a local celebrity and even guest starred on Daniel Tiger’s Neighborhood.
Gems and Minerals
One of the finest collections and displays of gems and minerals in the world can be found at CMNH. Exploring the Hillman Hall will dazzle the mind with more than 1,300 specimens from all over the world. The variety on color, shape, and texture is should to amaze.
And don’t miss the Wertz Gallery of gems and jewelry, where you can see want all the natural specimens look like when crafted into some of the most beautiful jewelry you’ve ever seen.
Find out more about gems and minerals of the world with CMNH’s Ask a Scientist Series:
Play
From Egypt to Pittsburgh
Every object has a story to tell, and Carnegie Museum of Natural History's new exhibit focuses on that theme with The Stories We Keep: Conserving Objects from Ancient Egypt from now through March 9, 2025.
CMNH has more than 5,000 objects from ancient Egypt, and most have never been seen by the public. This new exhibit highlights 80 of these items with unprecedented access that includes seeing them cared for and restored in real time, talk to a conservator and try your own handiwork on a replica.
Play
Go Beyond a Normal Visit
Carnegie Museum of Natural History is a blast no matter when you visit, but be on the lookout for special events and ways to make your next visit even more special:
Super Science Saturdays - Geared for children ages 5-12, each Super Science Saturday is uniquely themed and has stations set up throughout the museum offering hands-on activities, crafts, special exhibits and experts to help you learn even more.
21+ Nights - You've never enjoyed a museum like this! Grab an adult beverage (N/A available, too) and head to events that range from Jurassic Park trivia night to costume parties that explore the fact and fiction at the Haunted Museum.
Café Carnegie - We get it, most people don't prioritize eating at the museum they're visiting. But Café Carnegie will change that in just one visit with a fantastic menu, beautiful ambiance and walk-up wine and espresso bar.