Pittsburgh's Music Scene
Pittsburgh's music scene is full of talented artists you don't want to miss!
I’ve been lucky enough to perform live music for about twenty years, travelling as a musician to many other cities (and occasionally another Country or two), and I can truly say that there is no musical community anywhere on Earth quite like Pittsburgh.
In Pittsburgh, my first live musical experiences were as a spectator in 1990’s all-ages clubs, watching hip-hop artists like Strict Flow share the bill with emo bands and space-rockers such as Juliana Theory and New Invisible Joy. I’m now a little past performing regularly myself -- I would most likely be considered a ‘Dad Rocker’ at this point -- but with a bit of distance, I realized that I’ve witnessed entire generations and genres of amazing hometown artists come, grow, sometimes stay, and sometimes move along to other things. Above all else, I’m truly inspired by this continued trend of cross-genre collaboration so celebrated by Pittsburgh’s current crop of musicians, where it’s not uncommon to see an acoustic folk group perform alongside an EDM artist or hip-hop act, all united around a common love of song.
Here are a few of the Pittsburgh performers that have leapt out at me in recent years, particularly ones who continue to create inspiring work during the most challenging era that modern popular music has ever encountered.
Buffalo Rose
This modern folk/American band blends the best of classic acoustic bluegrass with impassioned three-part harmony vocals, and their live performances are truly haunting. The band has been featured in NPR’s All Songs Considered series, as well as American Songwriter magazine, and to me they embody that feeling of rallying your community, breaking beyond being just ‘your friend’s band’ to receiving widespread recognition and chart positions on hometown radio station WYEP-FM.
Roger Romero / f3ralcat
I first met Roger as a saxophone player working together in regional wedding bands, and was soon drawn into his F3ralcat project, a mix of jazz fusion, prog, and improvization alongside some of the hardest-hitting young musicians around. Roger grew up in a bi-cultural Bronx family, and we couldn’t be happier to now have him in Pittsburgh, releasing amazing music with f3ralcat like the new single “Anselm The Wise’ and an expected full-length in 2021.
Mars Jackson
An unbelievable hometown hip-hop talent, Mars seems to have the ability to capture the attention of any crowd, anytime, of any size or in any location. One of my favorite musical memories ever is sharing a stage with Mars and my own band one beautiful Spring evening outdoors at the Carnegie Museum of Art sculpture garden, to a crowd of art critics, curious city dwellers, and college students.
Sad Girls Aquatics Club
This indie-pop duo melds an atmospheric synth sound with great hooks, cool visuals, and a dark sense of humor. Their music video for ‘How Do I Get What I Want?’, produced locally at the end of 2019, is hands-down the best music video I have ever seen from a Pittsburgh artist, in which both members play a variety of characters in a quirky and gorgeously photographed high school setting...and the song’s chorus will never leave your brain.
Clara Kent
Winner of Pittsburgh City Paper’s top ‘People Of The Year’ Honor in 2019, Clara is equal parts vocalist, poet, and public speaker, with a voice that must be heard to
be believed. While bundled up at Downtown Pittsburgh’s Light Up Night 2019, my family and I rang in the Holiday season to Clara’s singing as a featured on-stage performer, with none other than Mr. McFeely as her opening act.
Meeting of Important People
I will include my own band in this list only as collaborators of the amazing City Theater Drive-In Music Festival outdoor series that took place this past Fall, in which we performed a live rock-and-roll show to a parking lot full of cars. The weather was amazing, and City Theater provided the perfect Pandemic live music experience with a large drive-in screen projecting the video feed, and the audio mix beamed safely to each car. Once we got used to the headlights flashing and horns honking instead of applause, I think we loosened up just enough to put on a decent show.

Jazz in Pittsburgh - Birth of Be Bop
Did you know that Pittsburgh had a profound influence on the American musical artform of jazz?
Pittsburgh is home to the mastermind behind the Big Mac. It is the location of the first commercial broadcast in radio by KDKA in 1920. And, of course, Pittsburgh is well known for having been a global hub of the steel industry. But did you know that Pittsburgh had a profound influence on the American musical artform of jazz? Pittsburgh's strategic location between New York and Chicago brought hundreds of the pioneers of jazz through the varied clubs and venues dotted throughout our city.
Jazz came to Pittsburgh's neighborhoods in the mid-1920s and, in fact, The Hill District became known as "Little Harlem" from the 1920s until the early 1950s. The epicenter of jazz music in Pittsburgh was the Crawford Grille in the Hill District, which opened in 1930. As jazz music's popularity rose, "The Grill" attracted jazz legends to its stage, including Ella Fitzgerald, Louis Armstrong, Dizzy Gillespie, Miles Davis, Billy Eckstine and Stanley Turrentine. The Grille became known as a spot where black artists and white artists could jam together without the shackles of segregation.
Birth of Be Bop
Just as Pittsburgh helped to shaped the varied genres of jazz, jazz has shaped the "joyful noise" of Pittsburgh. Music has always been an important part of Pittsburgh from Stephen Foster in the 19th Century to Wiz Khalifa today. Jazz. This distinctly American musical genre has an enduring legacy in Pittsburgh with an influential sound celebrated worldwide.
Local artists absorbed and learned from the unique stylings of the various master musicians passing through, and in turn developed new jazz flavors of their own. Pittsburgh jazz musicians are widely credited as the founders of the Be Bop, Hard Bob, and Vocalese styles of jazz.
A number of influential musicians emerged from our city. Stephen Foster (the father of American music), Kenny Clark, Mary Lou Williams, Ahmad Jamal, Erroll Garner, and Billy Strayhorn (Duke Ellington's primary musical collaborator for 28 years) all came from the Pittsburgh's East End neighborhoods.
A number of other musicians came from nearby communities outside of our city, including: Maxine Sullivan, Sonny Clark, and Earl "Fatha" Hines (the father of modern jazz piano). Trumpeter Roy Eldridge, drummer Kenneth Spearman "Klook" Clarke, pianist Dodo Marmarosa, and influential bassist Ray Brown were also born in Pittsburgh.
Other notable local jazz musicians include: Paul Chambers, Lena Horne, Eric Kloss, Walt Harper, Horace Parlan, Nathan Davis, George Benson, Art Blakey, Roger Humphries, and Jeff "Tain" Watts. And the list goes on...
Jazz Still Thriving in Pittsburgh
Be it Afro-Cuban, Latin, Swing, Dixieland, Bluegrass, or Fusion you can find jazz performed from clubs to street corners throughout Pittsburgh. Of course you can still experience great live jazz in the city's jazz joints, clubs and pubs, including the Manchester Craftsmen's Guild's MCG Jazz Series on the North Side, and Con Alma Downtown. Take the time to check out some of the many Pittsburgh jazz ensembles touring the regions' venues: Pittsburgh Jazz Society, Boilermaker Jazz Band and Pittsburgh Jazz Orchestra.
Jazz fans have a place each year in Pittsburgh when the annual Pittsburgh International Jazz Festival comes to downtown Pittsburgh, hosted each summer by the August Wilson African American Cultural Center. This festival brings in world renowned Jazz musicians and highlights local musician as well. Also hosted annually by the August Wilson African American Cultural Center is the Highmark Blues and Heritage Festival.
Jazz Musicians from Pittsburgh
It's known among jazz aficionados that Pittsburgh has an extraordinary jazz scene.
You can't find the breadth and quality of jazz happening in Pittsburgh in any city this size, anywhere.
The legacy is real.
Back in the day, jazz greats all passed through the 'Burgh on their way between New York and Chicago. Kids grew up in the 30s, 40s and 50s seeing their heroes in the flesh practically every night of the week. And they learned from them, they watched and listened and picked up those great vibes and sounds and moves that you still see and hear today in Pittsburgh's jazz joints, its theaters, clubs and pubs, including CJs in the Strip District and Manchester Craftsmen's Guild's MCG Jazz Series on the North Side. Also, don't miss, the annual Pittsburgh JazzLive International Festival every June in downtown Pittsburgh.

The legends are many; the talent could fill any Jazz Hall of Fame. Some are no longer with us but left an indelible imprint on Pittsburgh's jazz sound.

In jazz heaven this band of Pittsburgh greats entertains the saints:

Bass: Ray Brown, Paul Chambers
Drums: Art Blakey, Kenny Clark
Guitar: Joe Pass
Keyboards: Erroll Garner, Walt Harper, Earl "Fatha" Hines, Dodo Marmarosa, Mary Lou Williams
Sax: Stanley Turrentine
Trombone: Randy Purcell, Tommy Turk
Trumpet: Roy Eldridge
Written by: Billy Strayhorn
And sung by: Billy Eckstine, Lena Horne, Eddie Jefferson, Dakota Staton, Maxine Sullivan

And the baton has been passed to today's performers who carry on the tradition. Many of today's performers have jazz genes passed from father to son and daughter, brother to sister, brother to brother, uncle to nephew, grandfather to grandson. That's how jazz is in Pittsburgh, family, a way of life.

Aliquo, Don Sr. and Jr. on sax
Ashby, Jay and Marty on trombone and guitar, respectively
Benack, Benny Sr., Jr., and III on trumpet and sax, respectively
Betters, Harold and Jerry on trombone and drums/vocals, respectively
Brooks, Cecil I and II also on drums
Budway, David and Maureen on piano and vocals, respectively
Cardillo, Bobby and Harry on piano
DePaolis, Don and Tony, on piano and base, respectively
Heid, George and Bill, drums and keyboards, respectively
Humphries, Roger and Greg on drums

Other Pittsburghers heard around town and around include:
Bass: Dwayne Dolphin, Paul Thompson, Virgil Walters
Drums: "Tain" Watts
Guitar: George Benson, Joe Negri, James "Blood" Ulmer
Keyboards: Howie Alexander, David Budway, Frank Cunimondo, Craig Davis, Ahmad Jamal, Max Leake
Sax: Kenny Blake, Nathan Davis, Robbie Klein, Eric Kloss, Lew Stellute
Trombone: Jay Ashby, Harold Betters, Al Dowe, Slide Hampton
Trumpet: Sean Jones, John Wilson
Written by: Sammy Nestico
Sung by: Maureen Budway, Etta Cox, Jessica Lee, Tim Stevens

Many of these performers are part of these stellar Jazz ensembles touring Pittsburgh and the region:
Pittsburgh Jazz Society | Pittsburgh Jazz Orchestra | Roger Humphries and RH Factor Jazz Quintet | Boilermaker Jazz Band