Pre-Opera Talk Tuesday, November 12, 2024 06:00 PM Benedum Center

CAVALLERIA RUSTICANA/ PAGLIACCI Tuesday, November 12, 2024 07:00 PM 

Meet the Artists - Cavalleria Rusticana and Pagliacci Tuesday, November 12, 2024 10:00 PM Benedum Center

Pre-Opera Talk Friday, November 15, 2024 06:30 PM Benedum Center

CAVALLERIA RUSTICANA/ PAGLIACCI Friday, November 15, 2024 07:30 PM 

Pre-Opera Talk Sunday, November 17, 2024 01:00 PM Benedum Center

CAVALLERIA RUSTICANA/ PAGLIACCI Sunday, November 17, 2024 02:00 PM 

December Song Shop Saturday, December 14, 2024 12:00 PM - 01:00 PM Bitz Opera Factory

December 30, 2024 to January 7, 2025 No events listed

January 7, 2025 to January 15, 2025 No events listed

Armida Preview on WQED-FM 89.3 and wqed.org/fm Friday, January 24, 2025 07:00 PM WQED-FM 89.3 and wqed.org/fm

Pre-Opera Talk Saturday, January 25, 2025 07:00 PM CAPA Theater CAPA Theater

ARMIDA Saturday, January 25, 2025 08:00 PM 

Pre-Opera Talk Tuesday, January 28, 2025 06:00 PM CAPA Theater CAPA Theater

ARMIDA Tuesday, January 28, 2025 07:00 PM 

Meet the Artists - Armida Tuesday, January 28, 2025 09:00 PM CAPA Theater


OPERA MYTHBUSTING
Your opera journey begins today!
Intimidated by opera? Don't be! Let's debunk some common opera myths together!
If you’ve never been to the opera before, you may have some misconceptions. Don't worry, you're not alone! So let's shake off your preconceptions and learn what going to the opera is really like...  

MYTH: I'LL HAVE TO WEAR A TUXEDO OR A FANCY BALL GOWN
Come as you are or glam it up!
On weeknights people often show up in what they wore to the office that day, and on Fridays and Sundays, we see everything from dressy to jeans. On Saturdays – opening nights – some like to wear a suit or step out in a special dress. But just wear whatever makes you feel comfortable!
CasualDress

MYTH: BUT IT'S SOOOOO EXPENSIVE!
Tickets to Pittsburgh Opera's mainstage shows at the Benedum and Byham start at only $15... children and teens can even get in at half that price. That's less than a movie ticket and some popcorn!
There are even discounts for groups of 6+, students, 20-Something Tuesdays and more. 

MYTH: I WON'T UNDERSTAND WHAT THEY ARE SAYING
English texts are always projected above the stage, just like subtitles at the movies. While many operas are in Italian, German, or French, there are many in English too. You'll understand every word!

MYTH: OPERA IS BORING!
Do you think sword fights are boring? What about dancing, poisonings, secret plots, epic romances, or twist endings?
Operas have these in spades! That's why the term "operatic" has come to mean "dramatic to the nth degree." 

MYTH: OPERAS ARE TOO LONG
Operas come in all shapes and sizes!
The shortest opera we know of is 13 minutes long, and the longest one takes 7 days! You can find the running time for each opera we present on its main website page, under "Details and Resources." Many operas are the same length as any musical or play, with an intermission or two along the way. 

MYTH: ALL OPERA SOUNDS THE SAME
Just like music has changed a lot in the last 400 years, opera has too!
While almost all operas make use of "classical voice technique," which give operas their signature vocal style, the musical style can vary from Baroque to even Hip Hop!

MYTH: YOU HAVE TO HAVE A PhD TO UNDERSTAND WHAT'S GOING ON
You don’t need to study before you go to the opera any more than you have to study before you go to a movie!
Opera is a performing art meant to be enjoyed as is. For people who want to familiarize themselves with the plot in advance, there is a synopsis on the opera’s webpage and program books. And if you want to nerd out you can go to the Pre Opera Talk, Meet The Artists, or pick up a Study Guide at our education table. But you don’t need to do any of those to enjoy the show and understand what’s happening!

MYTH: OPERAS ARE ALWAYS DEPRESSING
Not so! There are many comic operas, operas for children, and heartwarming love stories too.
While there are operas that will truly break your heart or scare you to your core, opera plays with every human emotion, especially the good ones!


Our Mission
Pittsburgh Opera enriches Pittsburgh and the tri-state area and draws national and international attention to the region by:

Creating live opera at the highest standards of artistic excellence
Making opera accessible to a diverse audience
Developing young singers into tomorrow’s artists
Ensuring the future through responsible fiscal management
The current leader of Pittsburgh Opera is Christopher Hahn, who became Artistic Director in 2000 and General Director in 2008. During his tenure he has considerably expanded the company’s repertoire to include Baroque and many contemporary works, and he has vigorously upheld Pittsburgh Opera’s high standards of management and artistic excellence. He has expanded the Resident Artist Program to include two annual productions, both of which are offered as part of the full subscription series. He led the move to Bitz Opera Factory in the historic George Westinghouse Air Brake Factory at 2425 Liberty Avenue, in Pittsburgh’s Strip District, and developed a range of audience and community programs that take place there.
Pittsburgh Opera's current Music Director, Antony Walker, was appointed in 2005 and has brought an engaged and highly informed leadership to the company’s musical forces as well as developing a music staff of note.

Our Beginnings
Founded in 1939 by five intrepid women who belonged to Pittsburgh’s Tuesday Musical Club (pianist Virginia C. Byerly; contralto Carolyn Hunt Mahaffey; Priscilla W. Collins; Ruby N. Wickersham; and Marie M. Pease), these Founding Five established The Pittsburgh Opera Society, which would become the seventh-oldest opera company in the United States.
The first production, in March 1940 at Carnegie Music Hall, was The Tales of Hoffmann, with Mahaffey as Nicklausse. The company’s first conductor, Richard Karp of Vienna, led Pittsburgh Opera for nearly 40 years and oversaw the company’s move to Heinz Hall in 1971.
In 1983, Tito Capobianco, a stage director and prominent figure at New York City Opera, became Pittsburgh Opera’s General Director. Capobianco molded the Opera into an influential national company and a steward of cultural life in Pittsburgh. Under his direction, the Opera established its own orchestra, pioneered the use of supertitles, formed the Resident Artists Program and dramatically increased the region's audience for opera.
Mark Weinstein’s appointment as General Director in 1997 marked another milestone in the company’s growth. Weinstein, pursued rigorous financial management and long-range strategic planning. He increased the company’s assets threefold and cemented the Opera’s reputation as a leader in financial management in the region.
Weinstein initiated the Artistic Excellence Project, and raised major funds which led to the appointment of Christopher Hahn as Artistic Director in 2000 and John Mauceri as Music Director in 2001.

Our New Home
In 2008 Pittsburgh Opera moved to its current and permanent home in the Strip District, finally achieving the space to house the resources needed to better prepare for performances at the Benedum, while opening new ways for the community to experience all the artistry that is part of opera. In an effort to maintain the Company’s mission to enrich Pittsburgh and the tri-state area, the Opera has committed to the use of sustainable methods in the renovation and maintenance of the Bitz Opera Factory, obtaining a Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) Operations and Maintenance Silver Certification in June 2011.
In addition to its mainstage productions, Pittsburgh Opera produces a range of programs to engage and enrich the community, with more than 15,000 students, families and educators participating in its educational events annually. The internationally-renowned Pittsburgh Opera Resident Artist Program is among the country’s top five training centers for rising opera stars and the newly designed administrative and rehearsal space provides for events ranging from free community Song Shop Concerts to concert recitals by world-class opera singers.
Pittsburgh Opera’s long-standing commitment to artistic excellence, responsible fiscal management and good neighborship will continue to prove a valuable asset to the city of Pittsburgh and the surrounding region for years to come.

Since our founding in 1939, Pittsburgh Opera has enriched the Pittsburgh region by bringing live, world-class opera to our community. We have long been committed to making opera accessible to a diverse audience, but we recognize that a more focused outlook is necessary to ensure that our organization reflects the ideals of Inclusion, Diversity, Equity, and Accessibility (IDEA), in our public offerings as well as internally.
Pittsburgh Opera is dedicated to fostering a culture of mutual respect - respect for all stories, voices, experiences, and contributions. We aim to reflect this culture both through our leadership structure, programming choices, and employment policies, as well as through our interactions with our audience and the larger community.

We recognize and celebrate the rich cultural history of opera while also acknowledging that the classic repertoire is largely European and does not include the perspective or experience of many marginalized communities. Because of this history, it has been especially essential that Pittsburgh Opera recognizes these biases and continues to bring more diverse voices both to our stage and to our staff. For many years, Pittsburgh Opera has provided a platform for contemporary works on the main stage as well as part of our Second Stage Project. Through world premieres such as 2017’s The Summer King, about baseball legend Josh Gibson, and productions of As One and 27, we continue to showcase work by diverse composers and librettists, sung by diverse artists, and supported by a diverse artistic and administrative staff.
In addition, Pittsburgh Opera embraces a continued commitment to growth and conversation, as outlined by the following principles:
Inclusion: Pittsburgh Opera is committed to fostering an environment of mutual respect and a culture that values individual voices.
Diversity: Pittsburgh Opera is committed to encouraging diversity, and to engaging the larger community in order to ensure that our organization reflects the population we serve.
Equity: Pittsburgh Opera is committed to implementing policies of equity to ensure an even playing field for all.
Accessibility: Pittsburgh Opera is committed to integrating accessibility principles at all levels, ensuring that those with visual, physical, sensory, or other accessibility needs can experience opera without barriers.

TOSCA
Music by Giacomo Puccini
Libretto by Luigi Illica and Giuseppe Giacosa • OCTOBER 5, 8, 11, 13, 2024

She lived for art. Would she die for love?
When painter Cavaradossi—the lover of Rome’s enchanting diva Floria Tosca—decides to harbor a fugitive of the law, he makes himself and his beloved Tosca a target of the corrupt Chief of Police, Baron Scarpia. Now it is up to Tosca to free both her lover and herself from Scarpia’s clutches by making a horrific bargain that will have consequences for them all.
Puccini’s whirlwind political thriller packs high romance, dark motives, love, betrayal, murder, and intrigue all into a plot that unfolds over only 24 hours. See why Tosca is one of the most powerful operas ever written.
PERFORMANCE DATES/TIMES/LOCATION
slide-plusslide-minus
Where: Benedum Center, at the corner of 7th Street and Penn Ave, downtown Pittsburgh 
When:
Saturday, October 5, 2024  * 8:00 PM - ~10:35 PM (approx. end time)
Tuesday, October 8, 2024  * 7:00 PM- ~9:35 PM (approx. end time)
Friday, October 11, 2024  * 7:30 PM- ~10:05 PM (approx. end time)
Sunday, October 13, 2024  * 2:00 PM- ~4:35 PM (approx. end time)
SYNOPSIS
ACT I. Cesare Angelotti, an escaped political prisoner, rushes into the church of Sant'Andrea della Valle to hide. As he slips into the Attavanti family chapel, a Sacristan shuffles in, praying at the sound of the afternoon bells. Painter Mario Cavaradossi enters to work on his portrait of Mary Magdalene. Looking at the portrait, he compares her blond beauty to that of his raven-haired lover, the singer Floria Tosca ("Recondita armonia"). The Sacristan grumbles disapproval and leaves. Angelotti emerges from his hiding place and is recognized by his friend and fellow liberal Mario, who gives him food and hurries him back into the chapel as Tosca is heard calling outside. Tosca asks suspiciously why the doors to the church were locked and then reminds him of their rendezvous that evening at his villa ("Non la sospiri la nostra casetta?"). Suddenly recognizing the woman in the painting, Tosca is instantly jealous, but Mario reassures her ("Qual' occhio al mondo"). When she has gone, Mario summons Angelotti from the chapel; a cannon signals that the police have discovered the escape, so the two flee to Mario's villa. Meanwhile, the Sacristan returns with the choir that is to sing a Te Deum that day. Their excitement is silenced by the entrance of Baron Scarpia, chief of the secret police, in search of Angelotti. When Tosca returns, Scarpia shows her a fan he found in Mario's work space. Thinking Mario faithless, Tosca tearfully vows vengeance and leaves as the church fills with worshipers. Scarpia, sending his men to follow her to Angelotti, schemes to get the diva in his power ("Va, Tosca!").
ACT II. In the Farnese Palace, Scarpia anticipates the sadistic pleasure of bending Tosca to his will ("Ha più forte sapore"). The spy Spoletta arrives. He has not found Angelotti, but has arrested Mario, and brings him in for Scarpia to interrogate while Tosca is heard singing a cantata at a royal gala downstairs. She enters just as her lover is being taken to an adjoining room; he will be forced to confess under torture. Unnerved by Scarpia's questioning and the sound of Mario's screams, Tosca reveals Angelotti's hiding place. Mario is brought in; realizing what has happened, he turns on her, but Sciarrone rushes in to announce that Napoleon has won the Battle of Marengo, a defeat for Scarpia's side. Mario shouts his defiance of tyranny ("Vittoria!") and is dragged to prison. Scarpia now suggests that Tosca yield herself to him in exchange for her lover's life. Fighting off his embraces, she protests her fate to God, having dedicated her life to art and love ("Vissi d'arte"). Scarpia again insists, but Spoletta interrupts: faced with capture, Angelotti has killed himself. Tosca, forced to give in or lose her lover, agrees to Scarpia's proposition. The baron pretends to order a mock execution for Mario, after which he is to be freed; Spoletta leaves. As Scarpia finishes signing a safe-conduct document for the lovers, Tosca snatches a knife from the table and kills him, then wrenches the safe-conduct pass from the dead man's hand.
ACT III. The voice of a shepherd boy is heard as church bells toll at dawn. Mario awaits execution at the Castel Sant'Angelo; he bribes the jailer to convey a farewell note to Tosca. Writing it, overcome with memories of love, he gives way to despair ("E lucevan le stelle"). Suddenly Tosca arrives, filled with the story of her recent adventures. Mario caresses the hands that committed murder for his sake, and the two anticipate a brighter future. As the firing squad appears, the diva coaches Mario on how to fake his death convincingly; the soldiers fire and depart. Tosca urges Mario to hurry, but when he fails to move, she discovers that Scarpia's treachery has transcended the grave—the bullets were real. When Spoletta rushes in to arrest Tosca for Scarpia's murder, she cries to Scarpia to meet her before God, then leaps to her death.
DETAILS AND RESOURCES
We want you to have the best experience possible at our performances!
Here are some details and resources to help. Also visit our Opera FAQs or our Accessibility page.
Run time: approx. 2 hours 36 minutes (includes two intermissions)
Act I 46 minutes Intermission 20 minutes Act II 42 minutes Intermission 20 minutes Act III 28 minutes TOTAL2 hours, 36 minutes
Understand Every Word: Understand Every Word: Tosca is sung in Italian, but English supertitles are projected above the stage
Special Effects Notice: Simulated gunshots are used in this production
Parking Downtown: get real-time parking availability
Pre-Opera Talks before each performance
Braille Programs available at The Benedum Center
Large-Print Programs available at The Benedum Center
Download the Study Guide here.
CHILD POLICY:
Children must be ages 6 and up. Suggestions and tips for bringing children to the opera may be found at pittsburghopera.org/FAQ.
All children must have a ticket. There is a 50% discount for kids and teens ages 6-18.


CAVALLERIA RUSTICANA/ PAGLIACCI
Music by Pietro Mascagni, Libretto by Guido Menasci and Giovanni Targioni-Tozzetti (Cavalleria)
Music and libretto by Ruggero Leoncavallo (Pagliacci) • NOVEMBER 9, 12, 15, 17, 2024
An adulterous double feature
Jealousy, two-timing, and revenge unite the back-to-back tragedies of Cavalleria Rusticana and Pagliacci. Possessiveness, machismo, and rage fuel their bloody conclusions.
Cavalleria Rusticana: On Easter Sunday, Alfio discovers his wife Lola has rekindled her old romance with Turiddu.
Pagliacci: Just before a performance of his traveling circus troupe, clown Canio discovers the infidelity of his wife Nedda.
Join us for this back-to-back double feature of love and hate—the first time Pittsburgh Opera has performed these two operas together since 1996!
These performances are sponsored in part by The Gailliot Fund and by a generous gift from Robert and Christine Pietrandrea.
PERFORMANCE DATES/TIMES/LOCATION
Where: Benedum Center, at the corner of 7th Street and Penn Ave, downtown Pittsburgh 
When:
Saturday, November 9, 2024  * 8:00 PM- ~10:50 PM (approx. end time)
Tuesday, November 12, 2024  * 7:00 PM- ~9:50 PM (approx. end time)
Friday, November 15, 2024  * 7:30 PM- ~10:20 PM (approx. end time)
Sunday, November 17, 2024  * 2:00 PM- ~4:40 PM (approx. end time)
SYNOPSIS
CAVALLERIA RUSTICANA
A village in Sicily, circa 1900. At dawn on Easter Sunday, Turiddu sings in the distance of his love for Lola, wife of the carter Alfio. She and Turiddu had been a couple before he joined the army. When he returned and found her married to Alfio, he seduced Santuzza but now has abandoned her and rekindled his relationship with Lola. Later in the morning, a distraught Santuzza approaches the tavern of Mamma Lucia, Turiddu's mother, who tells her that her son is away buying wine. But Santuzza knows that Turiddu has been seen during the night in the village. Alfio arrives with a group of men, boasting of his horses—and of Lola. He asks Mamma Lucia if she has any more of her good wine. When she says that Turiddu has gone to get more, Alfio replies that he saw him near his house that same morning. Lucia is surprised, but Santuzza tells her to keep quiet. As the villagers follow the procession to church, Santuzza stays behind and pours out her grief about Turiddu to Mamma Lucia. The old woman expresses her pity, then also leaves for Mass. Turiddu arrives in the piazza. When Santuzza confronts him about his affair with Lola, he denies her accusations. Just then Lola passes by on her way to church. She mocks Santuzza, and Turiddu turns to follow her. Santuzza begs him to stay and implores him not to abandon her. Refusing to listen, Turiddu leaves, and Santuzza curses him. Alfio appears, late for Mass. Santuzza tells him that Lola went to church with Turiddu and reveals that she has been cheating on him. In a rage, Alfio swears to get even and rushes off, leaving behind the now conscience-stricken Santuzza.
Returning from the church the villagers gather at Mamma Lucia's tavern. Turiddu leads them in a drinking song, but the atmosphere becomes tense when Alfio appears. He refuses Turiddu's offer of wine and instead challenges him to a knife fight. Turiddu admits his guilt but is determined to go through with the fight, for Santuzza's sake as well as for his honor. The two men agree to meet outside the village. Alone with his mother, Turiddu begs her to take care of Santuzza if he doesn't come back, then runs off to the fight. As Mamma Lucia waits anxiously, shouts are heard in the distance. A woman runs in screaming that Turiddu has been killed.
PAGLIACCI
PROLOGUE Tonio the clown announces that what the audience is about to see is a true story and that actors have the same joys and sorrows as other people.
ACT I The same Sicilian village, 1949. A small theatrical company has just arrived and Canio, the head of the troupe, advertises the night's performance to the gathered crowd. One of the villagers suggests that Tonio is secretly courting Canio's young wife, Nedda. Canio warns them all that he will not tolerate any flirting offstage—life and theater are not the same. As the crowd disperses, Nedda is left alone, disturbed by her husband's jealousy. She looks up to the sky, envying the birds their freedom. Tonio appears and tries to force himself on Nedda, but she beats him back, and he retreats, swearing revenge. In fact, Nedda does have a lover—Silvio, a young peasant, who suddenly appears. The two reaffirm their love, and Silvio persuades Nedda to run away with him that night. Tonio, who has returned and overheard the end of their conversation, alerts Canio, but Silvio manages to slip away unrecognized. Canio violently threatens Nedda, but she refuses to reveal her lover's name. Beppe, another member of the troupe, restrains Canio, and Tonio advises him to wait until the evening's performance to catch the culprit. Alone, Canio gives in to his despair—he must play the clown even though his heart is breaking.
ACT II That evening, the villagers assemble to watch the performance, Silvio among them. Beppe plays Harlequin, who serenades Columbine, played by Nedda. He dismisses her buffoonish servant Taddeo, played by Tonio, and over dinner the two sweethearts plot to poison Columbine's husband Pagliaccio, played by Canio. When Pagliaccio unexpectedly appears, Harlequin slips away. Taddeo maliciously assures Pagliaccio of his wife's innocence, which ignites Canio's jealousy. Forgetting his role and the play, he demands that Nedda tell him the name of her lover. She tries to continue with the performance, the audience enthralled by its realism, until Canio snaps. In a fit of rage he stabs Nedda and then Silvio, who rushes to her aid. Turning to the horrified crowd, Tonio announces that the comedy is over.

ARMIDA
Music by Joseph Haydn
Libretto taken from Antonio Tozzi's 1775 opera 'Rinaldo', as amended by Nunziato Porta • JANUARY 25, 28, 31, FEBRUARY 2, 2025
All’s fair in love and war
To prevent the capture of Jerusalem by the knights of the First Crusade, The Prince of Darkness has sent the enchantress Armida into the world to seduce the Christian heroes and turn them from their duty. The bravest of these, Rinaldo, has fallen under Armida's spell. But, to her surprise, she becomes enchanted by him as well. She comes to love him so deeply that she cannot bring herself to destroy him. For both, duty clashes with desire. As war rages around them, will love conquer them both?
Containing some of Haydn’s most inspired music, not only is Armida Haydn’s most highly regarded opera, but the composer himself referred to it as his best work.
These will be Pittsburgh Opera's first performances of Armida. Pittsburgh Opera will mount a new production.
PERFORMANCE DATES/TIMES/LOCATION
Where: Four performances at Pittsburgh CAPA School Theater, Downtown
When:
Saturday, January 25, 2025  * 8:00 PM
Tuesday, January 28, 2025  * 7:00 PM
Friday, January 31, 2025  * 7:30 PM
Sunday, February 2, 2025  * 2:00 PM
SYNOPSIS
To prevent the capture of Jerusalem by the knights of the First Crusade, The Prince of Darkness has sent the enchantress Armida into the world to seduce the Christian heroes and turn them from their duty. The bravest of these, Rinaldo, has fallen under Armida's spell. She comes to love him so deeply that she cannot bring herself to destroy him.
Act 1 Scene 1: A council chamber in the royal palace of Damascus. King Idreno is alarmed that the crusaders have crossed the Jordan River. The heathen sorceress Armida seems to have triumphed over the crusaders, but fears that her conquest is not complete without gaining the love of the Christian knight Rinaldo. Now Rinaldo is obsessed with Armida and promises to fight against his fellow Christians, if victorious King Idreno offers him the kingdom and Armida’s hand. Armida prays for Rinaldo’s safety.
Scene 2: A steep mountain, with Armida's fortress at the top. The knights Ubaldo and Clotarco plan to free Rinaldo from Armida’s clutches. Idreno sends Zelmira, the daughter of the sultan of Egypt, to ensnare the Christians but on encountering Clotarco she falls in love with him and offers to lead him to safety.
Scene 3: Armida's apartments. Rinaldo admires the bravery of the approaching knights. Ubaldo warns Rinaldo to beware Armida's charms, and reproaches the dereliction of his duty as a Christian. Although remorseful, Rinaldo is unable to escape Armida's enchantment.
Act 2 Scene 1: A garden in Armida's palace. Zelmira fails to dissuade Idreno from planning an ambush of the crusaders. Idreno pretends to agree to Clotarco's demand that the Christian knights enchanted by Armida be freed. Reluctantly, Rinaldo leaves with Ubaldo. Armida expresses her fury.
Scene 2: The crusader camp. Ubaldo welcomes Rinaldo, who prepares to go into battle. Armida begs for refuge and Rinaldo’s love. Rinaldo departs for battle with Ubaldo and the other soldiers.
Act 3 Scene 1: A dark, forbidding grove, with a large myrtle tree. Rinaldo, knowing that the tree holds the secret of Armida’s powers, enters the wood intending to cut it down. Zelmira appears with a group of nymphs, and they try to get him to return to Armida. As he is about to strike the myrtle, Armida, dishevelled, appears from it and confronts him. Armida cannot bring herself to kill him; Rinaldo strikes the tree and the magic wood vanishes.
Scene 2: The crusader camp. The crusaders prepare for battle against the Saracens. Armida appears, swearing to pursue Rinaldo everywhere. As Rinaldo moves off, she sends an infernal chariot after Rinaldo.

MADAMA BUTTERFLY
Music by Giacomo Puccini
Libretto by Luigi Illica and Giuseppe Giacosa • MARCH 22, 25, 28, 30, 2025
His escape is her cage.
In this groundbreaking new production created by an all-Japanese and Japanese American creative team, Madama Butterfly’s story is transported to a fantastical realm where reality and dreams intersect.
Pinkerton puts on a VR headset and transports us into a vibrant virtual reality playground where he has ultimate control. As his avatar, a U.S. Navy Lieutenant, he can seduce and marry his fantasy girl and abandon her just as easily. But to Cio-Cio San, this is no game and the love and betrayal she feels is all too real.
Enveloped in Puccini’s stunning music, this visually beautiful production is the perfect match. Pittsburgh Opera is proud to partner with Cincinnati Opera, Detroit Opera, and Utah Opera to co-produce this reinvention of Puccini’s classic, uncovering new and resonant meaning for all audiences to enjoy.
PERFORMANCE DATES/TIMES/LOCATION
Where: Benedum Center, at the corner of 7th Street and Penn Ave, downtown Pittsburgh 
When:
Saturday, March 22, 2025  * 8:00 PM- ~11:00 PM (approx. end time)
Tuesday, March 25, 2025  * 7:00 PM- ~10:00 PM (approx. end time)
Thursday, March 27, 2025 * 10:15 AM–1:00 PM (STUDENT MATINEE)
Friday, March 28, 2025 * 7:30 PM- ~10:30 PM (approx. end time)
Sunday, March 30, 2025 * 2:00 PM- ~5:00 PM (approx. end time)
SYNOPSIS
In the present day, B.F. Pinkerton enters his apartment and dons a VR headset to escape into a fantasy. Within moments, he rejoins a game which transports him to Nagasaki, where he embodies his avatar as a U.S. Navy lieutenant. He inspects a house that he will occupy with his young bride, Cio-Cio- San (a.k.a. Madame Butterfly). Sharpless, the U.S. Consul, arrives, and Pinkerton shares his vision of a sailor in search of pleasure and the beautiful Japanese girl who has captivated him. Sharpless tries to warn him of this view, but Pinkerton laughs, toasting the American girl who will someday be his "real" wife.
Butterfly, her colleagues, and family arrive for the wedding. She tells Pinkerton that since her father's death, she now earns her living as a geisha. She also has secretly converted to Christianity. The Imperial Commissioner performs the marriage ceremony. Then, Cio-Cio-San's uncle, the Bonze, bursts in. He curses her, inciting the crowd. Protecting Butterfly, Pinkerton orders the guests away. Butterfly weeps and her new husband consoles her. As night falls in this pleasure fantasy, the lovers share a moonlit duet.
Three years later, modern-day Pinkerton and his American wife have grown distant. His only means of escape is through gaming, where he can manipulate his Japanese bride's future. In the virtual world, Cio-Cio-San patiently waits for him. Her servant Suzuki implores the gods for aid, but Butterfly bids her to have faith—one day, Pinkerton will return and embrace his wife again.
Sharpless enters with a letter telling of Pinkerton's marriage to an American. Before he can tell Butterfly, Goro interrupts along with a suitor, Prince Yamadori. Cio-Cio-San refuses his marriage proposal. She brings forth her young son, Trouble, and insists that as soon as Pinkerton knows of him, he will return. If not, she would rather die.
A cannon roars from the harbor, and Butterfly discovers Pinkerton's ship coming into port. She and Suzuki strew the house with blossoms. As evening falls, she prepares to keep vigil through the night.
Modern-day Pinkerton turns off the game and goes to bed. In the middle of the night, the game turns on, luring him back to play the next level, where he chooses how he will impact Butterfly's destiny. Pinkerton chooses an American wife avatar, Kate. As the level continues, Butterfly still waits, though Suzuki persuades her to rest. Soon, Sharpless, Pinkerton and Kate arrive. Suzuki realizes who the woman is and reluctantly agrees to inform Butterfly. Pinkerton, now aware of Butterfly's devotion, bids an anguished farewell and rushes away. Cio-Cio-San hurries in expecting to find her husband, and instead finds Kate. She instantly guesses the truth and touchingly wishes Kate happiness. She says that Pinkerton may have his son if he will return for him.
Butterfly orders Suzuki and Trouble away. She has no choice but to escape this nightmare, and she pulls out the dagger with which her father committed suicide. As she raises the blade to her throat, Trouble appears. Cio-Cio-San drops the knife and embraces him. She then blindfolds him, takes the dagger, and stabs herself. As the fantasy dies, Pinkerton desperately tries to hold onto his creation, Butterfly.

WOMAN WITH EYES CLOSED
Music by Jennifer Higdon
Libretto by Jerre Dye • APRIL 26, 29, MAY 2, 4, 2025
A family portrait
When Mona finds a mysterious suitcase filled with stolen masterpieces, she must grapple with a choice to save these priceless paintings or save her son—the thief. Burning the paintings would destroy the evidence of her son’s crime, but one of the paintings—Lucien Freud’s “Woman With Eyes Closed”—looks just like her own mother, a painter who died when Mona was still young. The uncanny resemblance unlocks long-buried memories that fuel the fires of three different possible endings.
This world premiere opera from award-winning composer Jennifer Higdon (Cold Mountain) is inspired by a real-life art heist, and confronts the question “what is the true value of a work of art?” This is an opera that needs to be seen at least twice; each night of the production has the possibility of a completely new ending!
PERFORMANCE DATES/TIMES/LOCATION
Where: The Bitz Opera Factory (Pittsburgh Opera's headquarters), 2425 Liberty Avenue, in Pittsburgh's Strip District
When:
Saturday, April 26, 2025  * 8:00 PM- ~9:15 PM (approx. end time)
Tuesday, April 29, 2025  * 7:00 PM- ~8:15 PM (approx. end time)
Friday, May 2, 2025 * 7:30 PM- ~8:45 PM (approx. end time)
Sunday, May 4, 2025 * 4:00 PM- ~5:15 PM (approx. end time)
SYNOPSIS
Seven priceless paintings have been stolen from the walls of a museum in the dead of the night. The police, the media, and the museum’s curator are desperate to find the culprit. In hopes of avoiding police detection, the thief (Thomas) has carelessly stuffed the stolen masterworks in a suitcase and abandoned them with his unsuspecting his Mother, Mona.
In her son’s absence, the reclusive Mona investigates the contents of the suitcase discovering both the severity of her son’s crime as well as the innate beauty of each masterpiece. One painting in particular (Lucian Freud’s WOMAN WITH EYES CLOSED) awakens something deep inside Mona, shaking her to the very core. The painting bears astriking resemblance to Mona’s Mother, an amateur artist who died when Mona was child. The circumstances surrounding her Mother’s death have reverberated throughout Mona’s life.
The police investigation continues to escalate, bringing an Inspector to Mona’s front door. Though Mona lies to the Inspector, successfully sending him on his way, she also knows that her flimsy deception is merely a temporary fix. The police already have evidence connecting Thomas to the crime. It’s a matter of time before he is apprehended. Mona must act quickly.
Night falls. Mona sleeps. As she dreams, the Freud painting comes to life. Inside a liminal state, Mona and her Mother briefly reunite. Inside this memory, the two women examine the past. They navigate the pain and compromise of a life half-lived, a life starved for color, expression, and connection. Together, they unearth the past trauma that continues to define Mona’s future.
With the dawn comes many burning questions: Can Mona save her son, save herself and save these priceless paintings whilesimultaneously preserving the memory of her Mother? WOMAN WITH EYES CLOSED is a new opera about creation, destruction and the art of letting go.

A Beginner's Guide to the Pittsburgh Opera
Everything you need to know about the Pittsburgh Opera!
Is your first thought of the opera people in stuffy suits having their glasses crack as singers hit the high notes? Fear not. We are here to help ask the hard questions (and provide some pretty simple answers).
Forget everything you think you know about the opera as we get you ready for the Pittsburgh Opera's next performance.
What is opera?
At its core, opera is simply storytelling with music and singing. Think of an opera as a musical, but the singers don’t use microphones and there is a live orchestra playing the music.
So it's like a musical or a play?
Opera is the ultimate performing art. It basically combines all the other performing art forms and rolls them into one.
A symphony orchestra can play a beautiful piece of music, but doesn’t usually have a story to it. A staged play will have a plot, and sets, costumes and acting, but typically no singing or live music – the actors are just talking. The cast in musicals typically use microphones to amplify their voices, whereas opera singers generally sing without amplification and have to project their voices over a 70-piece live orchestra playing in the pit. Opera has all the above, plus often choreographed dancing.
Are all operas the same?
Opera comes in all shapes and sizes. Pittsburgh Opera performs in up to four different venues each season. On one end of the spectrum are the big, grand operas which can only fit on the Benedum stage – Carmen, La bohème, The Barber of Seville. But they also perform intimate chamber operas in their own building for just 200 audience members.
Pittsburgh opera's latest season included operas about mermaids, knights, revenge, refugees and social justice making each performance unique and appealing to different audiences.
Clearing up Misconceptions
I won't understand what's going on!
The Pittsburgh Opera makes this easier than you'd imagine. They run supertitles above the stage so you can read along with the flow of the show.
But isn’t opera expensive?
No! While the best seats in the house can be pricey, Pittsburgh Opera offers adult tickets as low as $15. Tickets for kids ages 6-18 are half-price. Plus, Pittsburgh Opera offers a multitude of discounts for students, groups and other folks.
Don't I have to wear a tux?
Relax. The days of dressing up in your finest, wearing a tiara and carrying opera glasses are long gone. On a weeknight, work clothes are just fine. On a weekend, jeans are as appropriate as dresses and suits. It's your call on this one. Wear what makes you comfortable.
Is this homework? It feels like homework!
Hold on, this is supposed to be fun! You are going to the opera for entertainment, but getting some education is a natural byproduct of your experience. Embrace it!
We recommend listening to the opera in advance. Stream the opera on Spotify. Go to YouTube and watch video clips of other productions just to familiarize yourself with your show. Enjoy the immersion!
These were all written by dead white guys!
Certainly some dead white European males have written many of the most famous operas – people like Mozart, Verdi and Puccini.
But composers and librettists from around the world of all creeds, colors and genders are churning out new operas at a remarkable rate – in fact, we are living through an unparalleled period of opera creation. It’s not unusual for half of the operas in Pittsburgh Opera’s recent seasons to have been written within the past 10 years, by a diverse group of creators.
Enjoying the Pittsburgh Opera
How can I buy tickets?
Use the Cultural District's central ticket purchase service. If you need advice and want to talk to someone about seat locations, the ticket hotline is 412-456-6666.
If you’d like to buy your tickets in person while the Theater Square box office is under construction, you can visit the Benedum Center Box office on 7th Street. Its hours are Mon-Sat 10 a.m.-6 p.m. or until 30 minutes past showtime, Sun noon-4 p.m. or until 30 minutes past showtime.
Should I Bring Friends?
Yes, the more the merrier! The opera is the perfect place to celebrate a special occasion or just have a fun night out with your family, friends, or colleagues. Pittsburgh Opera’s group discounts start with just six people and bringing a group also unlocks special perks like backstage tours, private lounge spaces, and more. It’s easy to elevate your opera outing and make lasting memories by sharing the experience with more people in your life.
Where can I stay?
Coming from out of town for a getaway? You're in luck. There are plenty of downtown hotels to choose from, within walking distance of the Cultural District. All the major brands are there, from renovated historic buildings to ultra-modern skyscrapers. Check out ourcomprehensive hotel listings.
Where do I park?
Plan ahead. Use the ParkPGH app which shows real-time availability and prices for Downtown garages. There are also a number of metered spaces throughout town and the Go Mobile PGH app is a great tool for fast and convenient payment.
Where should I sit?
Again, this is a personal preference. Pricing is obviously a consideration, as are sightlines and your need to get up close and personal or being farther away to appreciate the entire production. If the broader view is better for you, then pricing and views from Orchestra floor or First Tier provide good options. If you want to feel like the queen, sit in the front of the Director's Circle.
How do I learn even more?
Here's where the opera company gives you even more assistance. Prior to every show, one hour before the curtain rises, experts give you some context, basically the where, when, and why of the opera you are about to see. It's right in front of the stage, you sit nearby, listen closely and prepare yourself for what's to come.
It's also a good idea to go on the opera website and read about the production, the story it tells and the nuances of what you are going to see. The site has lots of background info, videos, insight on the cast and more. There is also a study guide written by the opera's education team, giving you even more of the scoop. Locally, WQED-FM does a preview show twice prior to each opera production. This is a half-hour show, hosted by Anna Singer, featuring interviews with production personnel and performers.
Any other helpful hints?
Productions held on Tuesday evenings have receptions following the show with artists and staff attending. These are in the Benedum Center lobby. You can ask questions and get to know the folks who have just entertained you. Oh yes, one last thing, it's free!

