Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra The Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra PSO is an American orchestra based in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. The orchestra is resident at Heinz Hall, located in Pittsburgh's Cultural District. Since 2008, the orchestra's music director is Manfred Honeck. The orchestra's current president and CEO is Melia Tourangeau. History 1895 1910: Founding and early history The orchestra was founded by the Pittsburgh Arts Society with conductor Frederic Archer in 1895, who brought with him a number of musicians from the Boston Symphony Orchestra and led the PSO in its first concert the following year. In 1898, Victor Herbert was chosen to lead the orchestra.1 The orchestra traveled at a more frequent rate under Herbert's tenure, performing in Boston, Chicago, Washington, D.C., and Canada.2 Its personnel included such musicians as Luigi von Kunits later the first conductor of the Toronto Symphony Orchestra as concertmaster, first violinist Frederick William Stahlberg,3 second violinist John Stepan Zamecnik, assistant principal cello Gaston Borch, Paul Henneberg as first flute, and Leon Medaer as first clarinet.4 Herbert composed two orchestral works that the Pittsburgh Orchestra premiered: his Suite romantique op. 31 which he also dedicated to the orchestra5 and the tone poem Hero and Leander op. 33.6 Under Herbert's direction, the Pittsburgh Orchestra played as part of the Pan-American Exposition at the 1901 World's Fair in Buffalo, New York, for which Herbert had also composed an original work for the exhibition titled Panamericana: Morceau Characteristique for the Orchestra to perform.7 His tenure with the Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra ended in 1904 because of increasingly strident disagreements with the orchestra's manager, George H. Wilson, who disliked Herbert's populist manner and personally despised him.8 When Herbert left the orchestra in 1904, the Symphony Society chose as his successor Austrian conductor Emil Paur. Paur took an intellectual approach to his work and avoided theatrics. Trained as a violinist, he had served as conductor of both the Boston Symphony Orchestra and the New York Philharmonic, as well as guest conductor throughout Europe,9 and held the Pittsburgh Orchestra to the same exacting standards. Paur's programs emphasized the classical repertoire and increased the presence of works by Johannes Brahms, whose music was considered too challenging for most audiences at that time. Additionally, Paur clashed with many of the orchestra's musicians when he prohibited them from accepting outside performing engagements and continued to hire mainly European musicians.10 Orchestra manager George H. Wilson resigned on December 24, 1906, shortly after the beginning of Paur's third season, saying that his tenure, pride, and pleasure with the orchestra: Paur remained at the head of the orchestra until it disbanded in 1910. 1910 1938: The New Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra In the interim, concert promoter May Beegle founded the Pittsburgh Orchestra Association to bring other musical performers to the city.1213 Antonio Modarelli, an American conductor and composer, became conductor of the Pittsburgh Symphonic Orchestra in 1930.14 A German newspaper described his conducting as forceful, authentic, modern music,15 and he was invited to conduct in Moscow. He had taught at Duquesne University and been a band leader in the Navy prior to his work in Europe and with the Symphony.161718 This program of frequent guest conductors was made in an effort to restore the symphony to its golden years, but in effect demoted Modarelli, who was finally asked by the Board to resign in 1936.19 Otto Klemperer was responsible for bringing in much new talent while working with the Musicians' Union to hire both local and imported performers.20 Since then, the orchestra has experienced ongoing growth and development, including building a substantial endowment fund.citation needed 1938 1948: The Reiner years Fritz Reiner was music director of the Pittsburgh Symphony from 1938 to 1948. Reiner studied with Hungarian composer B la Bart k and programmed many of Bart k's works in Pittsburgh Symphony performances.2122 Women joined the orchestra for the first time during World War II. Eighteen women joined in 1942, and 24 more women joined in 1944. The PSO had more female performers than any other major American symphony during the war.21 Victor De Sabata came to Pittsburgh in 1948, in part because of the urgings of his colleague Vladimir Bakaleinikoff, whom he had conducted in Cincinnati in 1927. Ticket sales increased with de Sabata at the helm. He was so popular with local audiences that around 1,200 people attended a concert he conducted at the Syria Mosque during one of Pittsburgh's worst snowstorms.23 He returned to conduct the orchestra in 1949, 1950, and 1951.24 The orchestra established a Guest Conductor Chair in his name in 2010. 1952 1976: The Steinberg years William Steinberg became the orchestra's music director in 1952. During the early part of the 1950s, the Symphony played a number of industry concerts, conducted by Steinberg and sponsored by area industries, specifically the United Steelworkers of America. The sponsorship offset costs for industry workers, and the Symphony performed in more convenient locations throughout Pennsylvania, Ohio, and West Virginia.2526 The Symphony continued to bring music to smaller communities in partnership with Manufacturers Heat and Light Company and Columbia Gas during the Steinberg era.27 The Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra performed for audiences in Warsaw, Madrid, Berlin, Zagreb, Reykjavik, and 15 other locations throughout Europe and the Middle East during the State Department tour.28 Many of the orchestra's earlier recordings were made in the Syrian Mosque with labels such as Capitol Records and Columbia Records.29 The Pittsburgh Symphony performed at the Syria Mosque from 1926 until 1971. The building was torn down in 1992. Steinberg and the Pittsburgh Symphony made several recordings for the Command label starting in 1962. These recordings were made at the Soldiers and Sailors Memorial Hall in Pittsburgh. The technical superiority of the Command recordings was aided by the company's use of 35mm film as the recording medium.30 Steinberg conducted his final Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra concerts as music director in 1976, after which he returned for guest-conducting appearances as music director emeritus.3132 1976 1984: The Previn years Andr Previn succeeded Steinberg as music director in 1976. Previn had a collegial working style with symphony musicians and even formed a chamber music trio with Herbert Greenberg, associate concertmaster, and principal cellist Anne Martindale Williams around 1979.33 In 1981, Previn renewed his contract with the symphony orchestra.34 During this time, Victoria Bond served as an affiliate conductor of the Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra from 1978 to 1980. Bond was the first woman to earn a doctoral degree in orchestral conducting from the Juilliard School and is a prolific composer. While at the Pittsburgh Symphony, she also served as the music director of the Pittsburgh Youth Symphony and the New Amsterdam Symphony in New York City.35 Previn often brought jazz to the concert hall. In February 1977, the Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra and Previn made their national debut on PBS with eight specials, Previn and the Pittsburgh. The Alcoa Foundation sponsored the Emmy-nominated36 program, which ran for three years.37 Guests on the program included John Williams, Ella Fitzgerald, and Oscar Peterson. Previn left the Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra in 1984, but is credited with renewing the stature of the orchestra, expanding its position in the community, and giving the city a positive image internationally 38 1984 1996: The Maazel years Lorin Maazel became music consultant to the orchestra in 1984. In 1985, the orchestra elevated Maazel's title to music adviser and principal guest conductor. In 1988, Maazel became music director of the orchestra.39 Maazel announced in 1995 his intention to stand down music director of the orchestra in 1996, to focus on composition.4041 In addition to developing his compositional work, Maazel went on to direct and conduct the New York Philharmonic, along with several orchestras abroad. After his death in July 2014,42 the Pittsburgh Symphony performed memorial pieces for Maazel as well as created a multimedia exhibit featuring Symphony archival materials related to the late director.43 Marvin Hamlisch served as principal pops conductor beginning in 1995 until his death in 2012. 1995 2004: The second century A capital campaign was launched in 1993 to increase the Pittsburgh Symphony's endowment by 70 million. On April 10, 1995, the orchestra announced the appointment of Mariss Jansons to succeed Maazel in 1996 as its eighth music director.44 Latvian born Jansons was well received by critics and audiences in Pittsburgh, who applauded the warmth and humanity that he brought to the ensemble. In addition to directing the Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra, Jansons also served as an influential music director for the Oslo Philharmonic Orchestra in Norway until 2002.45 With Jansons, the Pittsburgh Symphony toured all over the world, introducing it to new audiences, and recorded extensively. During this time, the Symphony was innovative in drawing new elements of the Pittsburgh region s population to concerts in Heinz Hall and elsewhere. Jansons conducted his last year as music director of the Symphony during the 2003 2004 season, after which he began acting as director of the Bavarian Radio Symphony Orchestra in Munich.46 The Pittsburgh Symphony under Gilbert Levine was joined by the London Philharmonic Choir, Krak w Philharmonic Choir, Ankara Polyphonic Choir, and members of the Mendelssohn Choir of Pittsburgh in a program that included the world premiere of Abraham, a sacred motet by John Harbison, and Mahler Symphony No. 2 Resurrection.4748 The event, which was attended by the Pontiff, Rav Elio Toaff, Imam Abdulawahab Hussein Gomaa, and 7,000 invited guests, was telecast on RAI, on PBS, and throughout the world, and released on DVD by WQED Multimedia, Pittsburgh. Subsequent to this concert, at Levine's impetus, the Pittsburgh Symphony founded a series of concerts entitled Music for the Spirit.49 He led the first two of these performances of the Haydn Creation and Mahler Symphony No. 3 in Pittsburgh in 2006.50 2005 2007: Interregnum With the 2005 2006 season, the PSO introduced a different model for artistic leadership. During this time, a new collective bargaining agreement was in effect, which gave the musicians increased authority over matters of running the orchestra, such as the hiring of musicians and choice of repertoire. Starting in 2005, Sir Andrew Davis served as the PSO artistic advisor, with Yan Pascal Tortelier as principal guest conductor and Marek Janowski holding the endowed guest conductor chair. Sir Andrew Davis, while providing overall programming input regarding the entire season and leading the orchestra in a variety of styles, paid special attention to the music of British and American composers. Davis had been an organ scholar before becoming a conductor. Under his direction, the Symphony performed many symphonic, operatic, and choral works ranging from baroque to contemporary.51 Davis, a Knight Bachelor of Great Britain and music director of the Lyric Opera of Chicago, had previously led the Pittsburgh Symphony several times as a guest conductor between 1977 and 1990.52 Davis was originally scheduled to step down after the 2007 2008 season, but in October 2007, Davis and the Pittsburgh Symphony mutually agreed to terminate his contract early and for him not to conduct his scheduled concerts in the 2007 2008 season because of increased demands on Davis' schedule.53 The contracts of Tortelier and Janowski also expired in 2008.54 Janowski now holds the Otto Klemperer Guest Conductor Chair with the PSO. 2008 present: Manfred Honeck In May 2006, Manfred Honeck first guest-conducted the PSO. He returned for another guest appearance in November 2006. In January 2007, the PSO announced the appointment of Manfred Honeck as its ninth music director, effective with the 2008 2009 season, in a reversion of conductor leadership format to the traditional music director hierarchy.5556 His initial contract was for three years. In September 2009, the PSO announced the extension of Honeck's contract to the 2015 2016 season.57 In February 2012, the PSO announced the further extension of Honeck's contract through the 2019 2020 season.58 In June 2007, the orchestra announced the appointment of American conductor Leonard Slatkin as the orchestra's principal guest conductor for the 2008 2009 season.5960 In November 2006, the PSO announced a pledge of 29.5 million from the Richard P. Simmons family as the start of a capital challenge for the orchestra to address long-standing financial concerns.61 In December 2006, the PSO announced the launch of an 80 million capital fund-raising drive after the initial 29.5 million boost from the Simmons family.62 In March 2009, the PSO announced the discontinuation of its chamber orchestra series after the 2008 2009 season, along with staff reductions of 9 positions.63 In September 2009, the Pittsburgh Symphony and Honeck agreed to extend his contract through the 2015 2016 season. In February 2012, the PSO announced the further extension of Honeck's contract through the 2019 2020 season.64 In September 2018, the PSO announced the further extension of Honeck's contract through the 2021 2022 season.65 In September 2021, the PSO announced the newest extension of Honeck's contract as music director through the 2027 2028 season.66 Music directors Other conductors in leadership positions Broadcasts Previn and the Pittsburgh Launched in 1977, Previn and the Pittsburgh was a series of specials produced by WQED-TV. The Alcoa Foundation sponsored the programs, which ran for three years and became the highest rated classical music series on PBS. The program showcased the diversity of Music Director Andre Previn's musical interests, talents and friends. The first program explored Mozart, with Previn and the Pittsburgh Symphony's Patricia Prattis Jennings playing four-handed piano sonatas. Others featured guest artists John Williams, conducting his music from Star Wars and E.T., Ella Fitzgerald, Yo-Yo Ma, Pittsburgh Symphony principal cello Nathaniel Rosen the first American cellist to win the gold medal at the Tchaikovsky International Competition, composer Stephen Sondheim and violinist Itzhak Perlman. Composer Miklos Rosza appeared as a guest to hear the Pittsburgh Symphony play his Oscar-winning score for the movie Ben-Hur. Previn displayed his considerable talent as a jazz pianist in a duet with his friend Oscar Peterson, the man Duke Ellington dubbed the maharajah of the keyboard. When cameras came into Heinz Hall to film the Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra rehearsing in their shirtsleeves, audiences saw a relaxed maestro in bellbottoms who obviously liked and respected the musicians. The first show aired on February 27, 1977, and within two days the Pittsburgh Symphony sold more than 2,500 additional seats.67 Pittsburgh Symphony Radio Launched in 1982, the Pittsburgh Symphony Radio program is hosted by Jim Cunningham of WQED-FM. It is a complete two-hour concert with Music Director Manfred Honeck and guest artists heard on over 100 PRI and NPR stations across the country. The Pittsburgh Symphony was first broadcast in 1936 when NBC Blue Network began a series of 26 half-hour radio broadcasts over the NBC Blue Network of more than 90 stations. The broadcasts were sponsored by Pittsburgh Plate Glass Company.6869 Heinz Hall history A 10-million reconstruction of the theater took place between 1967 and 1971. Although much of the structure and d cor remained the same, a new five-story wing was added to the back of the building. This wing expanded the stage and rehearsal space along with the music library and dressing rooms.7071 Several concerts took place before the remodel and reopening of the Hall in 1971, including a performance of works by Berlioz, Beethoven and Brahms by the Leonard Rose, Isaac Stern and Eugene Istomin Trio for the 1969 pension fund concert. Questionnaires filled out by symphony followers were collected after the concert and reflected an overwhelming support of the new venue.72 Heinz Hall was dedicated in September 1971. The inaugural concerts took place on September 10 and 11 with William Steinberg conducting Beethoven's Consecration of the House overture and Mahler's Symphony No. 2 Resurrection with a combined chorus of Pennsylvania State University choirs. The New York Times published an outstanding review of the performances, citing the improvement of the acoustics over previous Symphony venues saying, Pittsburghers at last have the opportunity to hear the orchestra as it ought to sound.73 The Garden Plaza and a four-story addition to the Hall were completed in 1982 by the firm of MacLachlan, Cornelius Filoni. The plaza included a waterfall and sculpture by London-based artist Angela Connor. The addition to the Hall included two barlounge spaces as well as a dining and meeting room. In addition, some public areas were refurbished into reception facilities in 1988.71 A 6.5-million renovation began in 1995 with funding provided by the Howard Heinz Endowment and Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Strategy 21 program funds. The renovation improved the acoustical, technical and aesthetic qualities of the Hall and was carried out by Architect Albert Filoni, of MacLachlan, Cornelius Filoni, along with acoustician R. Lawrence Kirkegaard. The Hall reopened with a ribbon cutting ceremony by Governor Tom Ridge and Teresa Heinz.71 References External links

Pittsburgh Opera Pittsburgh Opera is an American opera company based in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Pittsburgh Opera gives performances in several venues, primarily at the Benedum Center, with other performances at the Pittsburgh Creative and Performing Arts School CAPA Theater. Pittsburgh Opera headquarters Archived 2009-09-07 at the Wayback Machine is located in the former George Westinghouse Air Brake Factory, 2425 Liberty Avenue, in the Strip District. Pittsburgh Opera has been awarded LEED Silver Certification by the U.S. Green Building Council2 and is the first green opera company in the U.S. in the Operations and Maintenance Category. Pittsburgh Opera's headquarters is also the oldest green building in Pittsburgh. History Pittsburgh Opera was established in 1939 as the Pittsburgh Opera Company and is the eighth-oldest opera company in the United States. The company was founded by five women who established the Pittsburgh Opera Society in 1939, making possible the inaugural performance of Offenbach's Les Contes d'Hoffmann at the Carnegie Music Hall in March 1940.3 The first director of the company was Richard Karp, from 1942 to 1977. His daughter Barbara Karp took over her father's duties during his final illness. James DeBlasis then served as interim artistic director after the resignation of Barbara Karp. In 1983, Tito Capobianco became Pittsburgh Opera's general director, holding this position until 1997.4 From 1997 to 2000, Capobianco was the company's artistic director, before leaving in 2000.5 Mark Weinstein became general director of Pittsburgh Opera in 1999, after starting as executive director in 1997.4 During his tenure, he presided over an increase in the company's endowment from US 4 million to US 16 million, as well as the retirement of US 2.5 million in debt.6 Weinstein also presided over the addition of an extra production during the company season, 5 productions as opposed to 4, from the 2001-2002 season to the 2003-2004 season.7 Weinstein announced his resignation as Pittsburgh Opera's general director effective February 1, 2008.8 Artistic Director Christopher Hahn was appointed as General Director in June 2008. During Christopher Hahn s tenure as General Director, the company s repertoire expanded considerably to include Baroque and many contemporary works. In 2017 Pittsburgh Opera produced its first world premiere, The Summer King the Josh Gibson Story. Based on the life and tragic death of the Hall of Fame baseball player who grew up in Pittsburgh and starred for the Homestead Grays and Pittsburgh Crawfords, The Summer King featured bass-baritone Alfred Walker in the role of Josh Gibson and acclaimed mezzo-soprano Denyce Graves as his love-interest Grace. Mr. Hahn has expanded Pittsburgh Opera s prestigious Resident Artist Program to include two annual productions, both of which are offered as part of the full subscription series. Hailed as one of the country's leading training programs for young singers, Pittsburgh Opera s Resident Artist Program provides professional development during a two-year session. The program has fostered the careers of singers that regularly perform on the world stage, including Marianne Cornetti, Rolando Villaz n, Oren Gradus, David Miller, Maria Zifchak, Kevin Glavin, Danielle Pastin, Sean Panikkar, and Audrey Luna. In 2017, Luna sang the highest note ever recorded in the Metropolitan Opera s 130-year history. Mr. Hahn also led the 2008 move to Pittsburgh Opera s new headquarters Archived 2021-06-14 at the Wayback Machine in the historic George Westinghouse Air Brake Factory at 2425 Liberty Avenue, in Pittsburgh s Strip District, and developed a range of audience and community programs that take place there. The building has a deep connection to Pittsburgh s storied past it was built as George Westinghouse s original air brake factory in 1869. At 45,000 square feet, the renovated building features offices, 4,000 square feet of rehearsal spaces, costume, wig, and makeup shops, and a kitchen, meeting the multimedia requirements of opera. The renovation resulted in Silver-level LEED certification in the Operations and Maintenance category in June 2011, and incorporates the site s exposed brick interiors, 150 historically-accurate windows and original metal fire safes. Christopher Hahn served as the company's artistic director from 2000 until his appointment as General Director. John Mauceri was Music Director of Pittsburgh Opera from 2000 until his resignation in 2006, to take up an academic post in North Carolina.9 In October 2006, Antony Walker was named the next Music Director of Pittsburgh Opera, and assumed the post immediately.10 Walker's initial contract was for 3 years, but has since been extended through the 2011-12 season.11 On April 1, 2008, in a performance of Verdi's A da at the Benedum Center, in the final act of the opera, Walker stepped in to sing the role of Radames from the orchestra pit, conducting at the same time, while the tenor acted the role on stage.12 Music Directors References External links

Pittsburgh Cultural Trust Background and History The Pittsburgh Cultural Trust has overseen one of Pittsburgh s most historic transformations: turning a seedy red-light district into a magnet destination for arts lovers, residents, visitors, and business owners. Founded in 1984, the Pittsburgh Cultural Trust is a non-profit arts organization whose mission is the cultural and economic revitalization of a 14-block arts and entertainmentresidential neighborhood called the Cultural District. The District is one of the country s largest land masses curated by a single nonprofit arts organization. A major catalytic force in the city, the Pittsburgh Cultural Trust is a unique model of how public-private partnerships can reinvent a city with authenticity, innovation and creativity. Using the arts as an economic catalyst, the Pittsburgh Cultural Trust has holistically created a world-renowned Cultural District that is revitalizing the city, improving the regional economy and enhancing Pittsburgh s quality of life. Thanks to the support of foundations, corporations, government agencies and thousands of private citizens, the Trust stands as a national model of urban redevelopment through the arts. Since 1984, the Trust has restored historic theaters, constructed new performance venues, commissioned public art projects and developed unique urban parks and riverfront recreation spaces. As one of the largest Downtown Pittsburgh property owners, the Trust manages one million square feet of property, including: The Trust encourages and presents diverse performing and visual arts programs. Its main programming divisions include: About the Cultural District During the G-20 Pittsburgh Summit, the international focus was on the David L. Lawrence Convention Center located in Pittsburgh s Cultural District, which is a project of the Pittsburgh Cultural Trust. This vibrant district sets the perfect stage for the international summit on economic recovery as a unique international model of urban revitalization through the arts and a paradigm for successful public-private partnerships. Once a blighted adults-only neighborhood known for sex shops, prostitutes and XXX-movie theaters, the Cultural District today attracts over 2,000,000 visitors annually generating an estimated economic impact of 303 million. Pittsburgh s third renaissance can be traced to H.J. Jack Heinz II, a founder of the Pittsburgh Cultural Trust. Mr. Heinz envisioned a colossal transformation that would turn a city once called hell with its lid off into a thriving hub of world-class art and entertainment, buzzing with 247 activity. His vision was two-pronged: the arts could serve as a catalyst for economic, commercial and residential development of Downtown Pittsburgh, while enriching the quality of life for residents and visitors alike. When other U.S. cities abandoned their respective downtowns for strip malls and big-box stores, Pittsburgh s Cultural District preserved its historical significance by leveraging the power of the arts to create an authentic destination that draws over two million visitors, arts lovers, students, residents and employers to over 1,500 events each year. The District includes Pittsburgh Ballet Theatre, Pittsburgh CLO, the Pittsburgh Cultural Trust, Pittsburgh Opera, Pittsburgh Public Theater, Pittsburgh Symphony and August Wilson Center for African American Culture, among hundreds of other arts groups and artists. The Cultural District is also home to the city s High School for Creative and Performing Arts. Unlike other cities that house cultural activity within a single performing arts center, Pittsburgh s Cultural District comprises 14 blocks that were holistically developed with the creation of multiple theaters, art galleries, public art projects, urban parks and riverfront recreation spaces. About

Explore the Cultural District The Cultural District, a project of the Pittsburgh Cultural Trust, is the epicenter for Downtown Pittsburgh s dynamic arts and entertainment scene. Packed into a 14-square-block area stretching from the Convention Center to Stanwix Street are world-class theaters, engaging art galleries, inspiring public parks and art installations, renowned restaurants, and diverse retail stores. These spaces are home to a year-round schedule full of fresh and exciting events, installations, and programming. Join millions of other visitors in discovering a multitude of choices for live entertainment, contemporary music, modern dance, visual art, and thought-provoking theater, as well as classical music, opera, ballet, popular musical theater, film, and more. No matter the occasion be it a family outing, romantic date night, or friend-filled excursion the Cultural District offers something for everyone to enjoy. Overwhelmed by all the choices Don t worry, we can help you plan the perfect Cultural District visit. The Pittsburgh Cultural Trust isn t the only member company of the Cultural District. Other partners include the Pittsburgh Ballet Theatre, the Pittsburgh CLO, the Pittsburgh Opera, Pittsburgh Public Theater, the Pittsburgh Symphony, and the August Wilson African American Cultural Center. The world of arts and culture doesn t end there, as the city s High School for Creative and Performing Arts also calls the District home. Other organizations that regularly use Cultural District theaters and spaces include Arcarde Comedy Theater, Bricolage, and Pittsburgh Musical Theater. About

